Anarchism is a political philosophy that advocates stateless societies based on nonhierarchical free associations .
Anarchism holds the state to be undesirable , unnecessary , or harmful .
While antistatism is central , some argue that anarchism entails opposing authority or hierarchical organization in the conduct of human relations , including , but not limited to , the state system .
As a subtle and antidogmatic philosophy , anarchism draws on many currents of thought and strategy .
Anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular world view , instead fluxing and flowing as a philosophy .
There are many types and traditions of anarchism , not all of which are mutually exclusive .
Anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally , supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism .
Strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism or similar dual classifications .
Anarchism is often considered a radical leftwing ideology , and much of anarchist economics and anarchist legal philosophy reflect antiauthoritarian interpretations of communism , collectivism , syndicalism , mutualism , or participatory economics .
Anarchism as a mass social movement has regularly endured fluctuations in popularity .
The central tendency of anarchism as a social movement has been represented by anarchocommunism and anarchosyndicalism , with individualist anarchism being primarily a literary phenomenon which nevertheless did have an impact on the bigger currents and individualists have also participated in large anarchist organizations .
Many anarchists oppose all forms of aggression , supporting selfdefense or nonviolence , while others have supported the use of some coercive measures , including violent revolution and propaganda of the deed , on the path to an anarchist society .
The term is a compound word composed from the word anarchy and the suffix ism , themselves derived respectively from the Greek , i . e . anarchy narxosἄναρχοςref . from the privative prefix ἀν , archos , i . e .
'leader' , ruler' ; and the suffix or .
The first known use of this word was in 1539 .
'Anarchistswas the term adopted by Maximilien de Robespierre to attack those on the left whom he had used for his own ends during the French Revolution but was determined to get rid of , though among theseanarchiststhere were few who exhibited the social revolt characteristics of later anarchists .
There would be many revolutionaries of the early nineteenth century who contributed to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation , such as William Godwin and Wilhelm Weitling , but they did not use the wordanarchistoranarchismin describing themselves or their beliefs .
PierreJoseph Proudhon was the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist , making the formal birth of anarchism the midnineteenth century .
Since the 1890s from France , the termlibertarianismhas often been used as a synonym for anarchism and was used almost exclusively in this sense until the 1950s in the United States ; its use as a synonym is still common outside the United States .
On the other hand , some uselibertarianismto refer to individualistic freemarket philosophy only , referring to freemarket anarchism aslibertarian anarchism' .
The earliest anarchist themes can be found in the 6th century BC , among the works of Taoist philosopher Laozi , and in later centuries by Zhuangzi and Bao Jingyan .
Zhuangzi's philosophy has been described by various sources as anarchist .
Zhuangzi wrote , A petty thief is put in jail .
A great becomes a ruler of a Nation . '
Diogenes of Sinope and the Cynics , their contemporary Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism , also introduced similar topics .
Jesus is sometimes considered the first anarchist in the Christian anarchist tradition .
Georges Lechartier wrote thatThe true founder of anarchy was Jesus Christ andnbsp ; . . . the first anarchist society was that of the apostles . '
Such a distinction reverberates subversive religious conceptions like the aforementioned seemingly anarchistic Taoist teachings and that of other antiauthoritarian religious traditions creating a complex relationship regarding the question as to whether or not anarchism and religion are compatible .
This is exemplified when the glorification of the state is viewed as a form of sinful idolatry .
The French renaissance political philosopher Étienne de La Boétie has been said to write an important anarchist precedent in his most famous work the Discourse on Voluntary Servitude .
The radical Protestant Christian Gerrard Winstanley and his group the Diggers are cited by various authors as proposing anarchist social measures in the 17th century in England .
The termanarchistfirst entered the English language in 1642 , during the English Civil War , as a term of abuse , used by Royalists against their Roundhead opponents .
By the time of the French Revolution some , such as the Enragés , began to use the term positively , in opposition to Jacobin centralisation of power , seeingrevolutionary governmentas oxymoronic .
By the turn of the 19th century , the English wordanarchismhad lost its initial negative connotation .
Modern anarchism sprang from the secular or religious thought of the Enlightenment , particularly JeanJacques Rousseau's arguments for the moral centrality of freedom .
There were a variety of anarchist currents during the French Revolution , with some revolutionaries using the term anarchiste in a positive light as early as September 1793 .
The enragés opposed revolutionary government as a contradiction in terms .
Denouncing the Jacobin dictatorship , Jean Varlet wrote in 1794 thatgovernment and revolution are incompatible , unless the people wishes to set its constituted authorities in permanent insurrection against itself . '
During the French Revolution , Sylvain Maréchal , in his Manifesto of the Equals , demandedthe communal enjoyment of the fruits of the earthand looked forward to the disappearance ofthe revolting distinction of rich and poor , of great and small , of masters and valets , of governors and governed . '
From this climate William Godwin developed what many consider the first expression of modern anarchist thought .
Godwin was , according to Peter Kropotkin , the first to formulate the political and economical conceptions of anarchism , even though he did not give that name to the ideas developed in his work' , while Godwin attached his anarchist ideas to an early Edmund Burke .
Benjamin Tucker instead credits Josiah Warren , an American who promoted stateless and voluntary communities where all goods and services were private , with beingthe first man to expound and formulate the doctrine now known as Anarchism . '
The first to describe himself as an anarchist was PierreJoseph Proudhon , a French philosopher and politician , which led some to call him the founder of modern anarchist theory .
The anarchocommunist Joseph Déjacque was the first person to describe himself aslibertarian' .
Unlike Proudhon , he argued that , it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to , but to the satisfaction of his or her needs , whatever may be their nature . '
In 1844 in Germany the posthegelian philosopher Max Stirner published the book The Ego and Its Own which will later be considered an influential early text of individualist anarchism .
Anarchists active in the 1848 Revolution in France , included Anselme Bellegarrigue , Ernest Coeurderoy , Joseph Déjacque and Pierre Joseph Proudhon .
In Europe , harsh reaction followed the revolutions of 1848 , during which ten countries had experienced brief or longterm social upheaval as groups carried out nationalist uprisings .
After most of these attempts at systematic change ended in failure , conservative elements took advantage of the divided groups of socialists , anarchists , liberals , and nationalists , to prevent further revolt .
In 1864 the International Workingmens Association united diverse revolutionary currents including French followers of Proudhon , Blanquists , Philadelphes , English trade unionists , socialists and social democrats .
Due to its links to active workersmovements , the International became a significant organization .
Karl Marx became a leading figure in the International and a member of its General Council .
Proudhon's followers , the mutualists , opposed Marx's state socialism , advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings .
In 1868 , following their unsuccessful participation in the League of Peace and Freedom , Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin and his collectivist anarchist associates joined the First International .
They allied themselves with the federalist socialist sections of the International , who advocated the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the collectivization of property .
At first , the collectivists worked with the Marxists to push the First International in a more revolutionary socialist direction .
Subsequently , the International became polarised into two camps , with Marx and Bakunin as their respective figureheads .
Bakunin characterised Marx's ideas as centralist and predicted that , if a Marxist party came to power , its leaders would simply take the place of the ruling class they had fought against .
Anarchist historian George Woodcock reports thatThe annual Congress of the International had not taken place in 1870 owing to the outbreak of the Paris Commune , and in 1871 the General Council called only a special conference in London .
One delegate was able to attend from Spain and none from Italy , while a technical excuse that they had split away from the Fédération Romande was used to avoid inviting Bakunin's Swiss supporters .
Thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present , and the General Council's resolutions passed almost unanimously .
Most of them were clearly directed against Bakunin and his followers . '
In 1872 , the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the Hague Congress , where Bakunin and James Guillaume were expelled from the International and its headquarters were transferred to New York .
In response , the federalist sections formed their own International at the St Imier Congress , adopting a revolutionary anarchist program .
The Paris Commune was a government that briefly ruled Paris from 18 March to 28 May 1871 .
The Commune was the result of an uprising in Paris after France was defeated in the FrancoPrussian War .
Anarchists participated actively in the establishment of the Paris Commune .
They included George Woodcock manifests that The antiauthoritarian sections of the First International were the precursors of the anarchosyndicalists , seeking toreplace the privilege and authority of the Statewith thefree and spontaneous organization of labor . '
In 1886 , the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions of the United States and Canada unanimously set 1 May 1886 , as the date by which the eighthour work day would become standard .
In response , unions across the United States prepared a general strike in support of the event .
On 3 May , in Chicago , a fight broke out when strikebreakers attempted to cross the picket line , and two workers died when police opened fire upon the crowd .
The next day , 4 May , anarchists staged a rally at Chicago's Haymarket Square .
A bomb was thrown by an unknown party near the conclusion of the rally , killing an officer .
In the ensuing panic , police opened fire on the crowd and each other .
Seven police officers and at least four workers were killed .
Eight anarchists directly and indirectly related to the organisers of the rally were arrested and charged with the murder of the deceased officer .
The men became international political celebrities among the labour movement .
Four of the men were executed and a fifth committed suicide prior to his own execution .
The incident became known as the Haymarket affair , and was a setback for the labour movement and the struggle for the eighthour day .
In 1890 a second attempt , this time international in scope , to organise for the eighthour day was made .
The event also had the secondary purpose of memorializing workers killed as a result of the Haymarket affair .
Although it had initially been conceived as a onceoff event , by the following year the celebration of International Workers Day on May Day had become firmly established as an international worker's holiday .
In 1907 , the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam gathered delegates from 14 different countries , among which important figures of the anarchist movement , including Errico Malatesta , Pierre Monatte , Luigi Fabbri , Benoît Broutchoux , Emma Goldman , Rudolf Rocker , and Christiaan Cornelissen .
Various themes were treated during the Congress , in particular concerning the organisation of the anarchist movement , popular education issues , the general strike or antimilitarism .
A central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and syndicalism .
Malatesta and Monatte were in particular disagreement themselves on this issue , as the latter thought that syndicalism was revolutionary and would create the conditions of a social revolution , while Malatesta did not consider syndicalism by itself sufficient .
He thought that the tradeunion movement was reformist and even conservative , citing as essentially bourgeois and antiworker the phenomenon of professional union officials .
Malatesta warned that the syndicalists aims were in perpetuating syndicalism itself , whereas anarchists must always have anarchy as their end and consequently refrain from committing to any particular method of achieving it .
The Spanish Workers Federation in 1881 was the first major anarchosyndicalist movement ; anarchist trade union federations were of special importance in Spain .
The most successful was the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo , founded in 1910 .
Before the 1940s , the CNT was the major force in Spanish working class politics , attracting 1 . 58 million members at one point and playing a major role in the Spanish Civil War .
The CNT was affiliated with the International Workers Association , a federation of anarchosyndicalist trade unions founded in 1922 , with delegates representing two million workers from 15 countries in Europe and Latin America .
In Latin America in particularThe anarchists quickly became active in organizing craft and industrial workers throughout South and Central America , and until the early 1920s most of the trade unions in Mexico , Brazil , Peru , Chile , and Argentina were anarchosyndicalist in general outlook ; the prestige of the Spanish C . N . T . as a revolutionary organization was undoubtedly to a great extent responsible for this situation .
The largest and most militant of these organizations was the Federación Obrera Regional Argentinanbsp ; . . . it grew quickly to a membership of nearly a quarter of a million , which dwarfed the rival socialdemocratic unions . '
Some anarchists , such as Johann Most , advocated publicizing violent acts of retaliation against counterrevolutionaries becausewe preach not only action in and for itself , but also action as propaganda . '
By the 1880s , people inside and outside the anarchist movement began to use the slogan , propaganda of the deedto refer to individual bombings , regicides , and tyrannicides .
From 1905 onwards , the Russian counterparts of these antisyndicalist anarchistcommunists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegalexpropriations' . '
Illegalism as a practice emerged and within itThe acts of the anarchist bombers and assassins and the anarchist burglars expressed their desperation and their personal , violent rejection of an intolerable society .
Moreover , they were clearly meant to be exemplary invitations to revolt . ' .
France's Bonnot Gang was the most famous group to embrace illegalism .
However , as soon as 1887 , important figures in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts .
Peter Kropotkin thus wrote that year in Le Révolté thata structure based on centuries of history cannot be destroyed with a few kilos of dynamite' .
A variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favor of collective revolutionary action , for example through the trade union movement .
The anarchosyndicalist , Fernand Pelloutier , argued in 1895 for renewed anarchist involvement in the labor movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well withoutthe individual dynamiter . '
State repression of the anarchist and labor movements following the few successful bombings and assassinations may have contributed to the abandonment of these kinds of tactics , although reciprocally state repression , in the first place , may have played a role in these isolated acts .
The dismemberment of the French socialist movement , into many groups and , following the suppression of the 1871 Paris Commune , the execution and exile of many communards to penal colonies , favored individualist political expression and acts .
Numerous heads of state were assassinated between 1881 and 1914 by members of the anarchist movement .
For example , U . S .
President McKinley's assassin Leon Czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist Emma Goldman .
Bombings were associated in the media with anarchists because international terrorism arose during this time period with the widespread distribution of dynamite .
This image remains to this day .
Propaganda of the deed was abandoned by the vast majority of the anarchist movement after World War I and the 1917 October Revolution .
Anarchists participated alongside the Bolsheviks in both February and October revolutions , and were initially enthusiastic about the Bolshevik revolution .
However , following a political falling out with the Bolsheviks by the anarchists and other leftwing opposition , the conflict culminated in the 1921 Kronstadt rebellion , which the new government repressed .
Anarchists in central Russia were either imprisoned , driven underground or joined the victorious Bolsheviks ; the anarchists from Petrograd and Moscow fled to the Ukraine .
There , in the Free Territory , they fought in the civil war against the Whites and then the Bolsheviks as part of the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine led by Nestor Makhno , who established an anarchist society in the region for a number of months .
Expelled American anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman were amongst those agitating in response to Bolshevik policy and the suppression of the Kronstadt uprising , before they left Russia .
Both wrote accounts of their experiences in Russia , criticizing the amount of control the Bolsheviks exercised .
For them , Bakunin's predictions about the consequences of Marxist rule that the rulers of the newsocialistMarxist state would become a new elite had proved all too true .
The victory of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally .
Many workers and activists saw Bolshevik success as setting an example ; Communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements .
In France and the United States , for example , members of the major syndicalist movements of the CGT and IWW left the organizations and joined the Communist International .
The revolutionary wave of 191723 saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of protagonism .
In the German uprising known as the German Revolution of 19181919 which established the Bavarian Soviet Republic the anarchists Gustav Landauer , Silvio Gesell and Erich Mühsam had important leadership positions within the revolutionary councilist structures .
In the Italian events known as the biennio rosso the anarchosyndicalist trade union Unione Sindacale Italianagrew to 800 , 000 members and the influence of the Italian Anarchist Union grew accordinglynbsp ; . . .
Anarchists were the first to suggest occupying workplaces .
In the Mexican Revolution the Mexican Liberal Party was established and during the early 1910s it lead a series of military offensives leading to the conquest and occupation of certain towns and districts in Baja California with the leadership of anarchocommunist Ricardo Flores Magón .
In Paris , the Dielo Truda group of Russian anarchist exiles , which included Nestor Makhno , concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of Bolshevism .
Their 1926 manifesto , called the Organizational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists Draft , was supported .
Platformist groups active today include the Workers Solidarity Movement in Ireland and the North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists of North America .
Synthesis anarchism emerged as an organizational alternative to platformism that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives .
In the 1920s this form found as its main proponents Volin and Sebastien Faure .
It is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global International of Anarchist Federations .
In the 1920s and 1930s , the rise of fascism in Europe transformed anarchism's conflict with the state .
Italy saw the first struggles between anarchists and fascists .
Italian anarchists played a key role in the antifascist organisation Arditi del Popolo , which was strongest in areas with anarchist traditions , and achieved some success in their activism , such as repelling Blackshirts in the anarchist stronghold of Parma in August 1922 .
The veteran Italian anarchist , Luigi Fabbri , was one of the first critical theorists of fascism , describing it asthe preventive counterrevolution . '
In France , where the far right leagues came close to insurrection in the February 1934 riots , anarchists divided over a united front policy .
Anarchists in France and Italy were active in the Resistance during World War II .
In Germany the anarchist Erich Mühsam was arrested on charges unknown in the early morning hours of 28 February 1933 , within a few hours after the Reichstag fire in Berlin .
Joseph Goebbels , the Nazi propaganda minister , labelled him as one ofthose Jewish subversives . '
Over the next seventeen months , he would be imprisoned in the concentration camps at Sonnenburg , Brandenburg and finally , Oranienburg .
On 2 February 1934 , Mühsam was transferred to the concentration camp at Oranienburg when finally on the night of 9 July 1934 , Mühsam was tortured and murdered by the guards , his battered corpse found hanging in a latrine the next morning .
In Spain , the national anarchosyndicalist trade union Confederación Nacional del Trabajo initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance , and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right wing election victory .
But in 1936 , the CNT changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power .
Months later , the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing the Spanish Civil War .
In response to the army rebellion , an anarchistinspired movement of peasants and workers , supported by armed militias , took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivised the land .
But even before the fascist victory in 1939 , the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists , who controlled the distribution of military aid to the Republican cause from the Soviet Union .
The events known as the Spanish Revolution was a workerssocial revolution that began during the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and more broadly libertarian socialist organizational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years , primarily Catalonia , Aragon , Andalusia , and parts of the Levante .
Much of Spains economy was put under worker control ; in anarchist strongholds like Catalonia , the figure was as high as 75 , but lower in areas with heavy Communist Party of Spain influence , as the Sovietallied party actively resisted attempts at collectivization enactment .
Factories were run through worker committees , agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian communes .
Anarchist historian Sam Dolgoff estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least indirectly in the Spanish Revolution , which he claimedcame closer to realizing the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any other revolution in history . '
Stalinistled troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident Marxists and anarchists .
The prominent Italian anarchist Camillo Berneri , who volunteered to fight against Franco was killed instead in Spain by gunmen associated with the Spanish Communist Party .
Anarchism sought to reorganize itself after the war .
The Mexican Anarchist Federation was established in 1945 after the Anarchist Federation of the Center united with the Anarchist Federation of the Federal District .
In the early 1940s , the Antifascist International Solidarity and the Federation of Anarchist Groups of Cuba merged into the large national organization Asociación Libertaria de Cuba .
From 1944 to 1947 , the Bulgarian Anarchist Communist Federation reemerged as part of a factory and workplace committee movement , but was repressed by the new Communist regime .
In 1945 in France the Fédération Anarchiste was established and the also synthesist Federazione Anarchica Italiana was founded in Italy .
Korean anarchists formed the League of Free Social Constructors in September 1945 and in 1946 the Japanese Anarchist Federation was founded .
An International Anarchist Congress with delegates from across Europe was held in Paris in May 1948 .
After World War II , an appeal in the Fraye Arbeter Shtime detailing the plight of German anarchists and called for Americans to support them .
By February 1946 , the sending of aid parcels to anarchists in Germany was a largescale operation .
The Federation of Libertarian Socialists was founded in Germany in 1947 and Rudolf Rocker wrote for its organ , Die Freie Gesellschaft , which survived until 1953 .
In 1956 the Uruguayan Anarchist Federation was founded .
In 1955 the AnarchoCommunist Federation of Argentina renamed itself as the Argentine Libertarian Federation .
The organizational debate between synthesis anarchism and platformism took importance once again especially in the anarchist movements of Italy and France .
The Syndicalist Workers Federation was a syndicalist group in active in postwar Britain , and one of Solidarity Federation's earliest predecessors .
It was formed in 1950 by members of the dissolved Anarchist Federation of Britain .
Unlike the AFB , which was influenced by anarchosyndicalist ideas but ultimately not syndicalist itself , the SWF decided to pursue a more definitely syndicalist , workercentred strategy from the outset .
Anarchism continued to influence important literary and intellectual personalities of the time , such as Albert Camus , Herbert Read , Paul Goodman , Dwight Macdonald , Allen Ginsberg , George Woodcock , Leopold Kohr , Julian Beck , John Cage and the French Surrealist group led by André Breton , which now openly embraced anarchism and collaborated in the Fédération Anarchiste .
Anarchopacifism became influential in the Antinuclear movement and anti war movements of the time as can be seen in the activism and writings of the English anarchist member of Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Alex Comfort or the similar activism of the American catholic anarchopacifists Ammon Hennacy and Dorothy Day .
Anarchopacifism became abasis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the Cold War . '
The resurgence of anarchist ideas during this period is well documented in Robert Graham's , Volume Two : The Emergence of the New Anarchism .
A surge of popular interest in anarchism occurred in western nations during the 1960s and 1970s .
Anarchism was influential in the Counterculture of the 1960s and anarchists actively participated in the late sixties students and workers revolts .
In 1968 in Carrara , Italy the International of Anarchist Federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in 1968 by the three existing European federations of France , the Federazione Anarchica Italiana of Italy and the Iberian Anarchist Federation as well as the Bulgarian federation in French exile .
In the United Kingdom in the 1970s this was associated with the punk rock movement , as exemplified by bands such as Crass and the Sex Pistols .
The housing and employment crisis in most of Western Europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of Barcelona , Spain .
In Denmark , squatters occupied a disused military base and declared the Freetown Christiania , an autonomous haven in central Copenhagen .
Since the revival of anarchism in the mid 20th century , a number of new movements and schools of thought emerged .
Although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarchafeminism , they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the 1960s .
The American Civil Rights Movement and the movement against the war in Vietnam also contributed to the revival of North American anarchism .
European anarchism of the late 20th century drew much of its strength from the labour movement , and both have incorporated animal rights activism .
Anarchist anthropologist David Graeber and anarchist historian Andrej Grubacic have posited a rupture between generations of anarchism , with thosewho often still have not shaken the sectarian habitsof the 19th century contrasted with the younger activists who aremuch more informed , among other elements , by indigenous , feminist , ecological and culturalcritical ideas' , and who by the turn of the 21st century formedby far the majorityof anarchists .
Around the turn of the 21st century , anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the antiwar , anticapitalist , and antiglobalisation movements .
Anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the World Trade Organization , Group of Eight , and the World Economic Forum .
Some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting , property destruction , and violent confrontations with police .
These actions were precipitated by ad hoc , leaderless , anonymous cadres known as black blocs ; other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture , affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet .
A significant event of this period was the confrontations at WTO conference in Seattle in 1999 .
According to anarchist scholar Simon Critchley , contemporary anarchism can be seen as a powerful critique of the pseudolibertarianism of contemporary neoliberalismnbsp ; . . .
One might say that contemporary anarchism is about responsibility , whether sexual , ecological or socioeconomic ; it flows from an experience of conscience about the manifold ways in which the West ravages the rest ; it is an ethical outrage at the yawning inequality , impoverishment and disenfranchisment that is so palpable locally and globally . '
International anarchist federations in existence include the International of Anarchist Federations , the International Workers Association , and International Libertarian Solidarity .
The largest organised anarchist movement today is in Spain , in the form of the Confederación General del Trabajo and the CNT .
CGT membership was estimated at around 100 , 000 for 2003 .
Other active syndicalist movements include in Sweden the Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden and the Swedish Anarchosyndicalist Youth Federation ; the CNTAIT in France ; the Union Sindicale Italiana in Italy ; in the US Workers Solidarity Alliance and the UK Solidarity Federation .
The revolutionary industrial unionist Industrial Workers of the World , claiming 2 , 000 paying members , and the International Workers Association , an anarchosyndicalist successor to the First International , also remain active .
Anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions , individualist anarchism and social anarchism , which have some different origins , values and evolution .
The individualist wing of anarchism emphasises negative liberty , i . e . opposition to state or social control over the individual , while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one's potential and argue that humans have needs that society ought to fulfill , recognizing equality of entitlement' .
In a chronological and theoretical sense , there are classical those created throughout the 19th century and postclassical anarchist schools those created since the mid20th century and after .
Beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism , which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it .
A component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate , and usually temporary , necessary evilbut argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy .
One reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu wasanarchism without adjectives' , a call for toleration first adopted by Fernando Tarrida del Mármol in 1889 in response to thebitter debatesof anarchist theory at the time .
In abandoning the hyphenated anarchisms , it sought to emphasise the antiauthoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought .
Mutualism began in 18thcentury English and French labour movements before taking an anarchist form associated with PierreJoseph Proudhon in France and others in the United States .
Proudhon proposed spontaneous order , whereby organization emerges without central authority , apositive anarchywhere order arises when everybody doeswhat he wishes and only what he wishesand wherebusiness transactions alone produce the social order . '
It is important to recognize that Proudhon distinguished between ideal political possibilities and practical governance .
For this reason , much in contrast to some of his theoretical statements concerning ultimate spontaneous selfgovernance , Proudhon was heavily involved in French parliamentary politics and allied himself not with Anarchist but Socialist factions of workers movements and , in addition to advocating stateprotected charters for workerowned cooperatives , promoted certain nationalization schemes during his life of public service .
Mutualist anarchism is concerned with reciprocity , free association , voluntary contract , federation , and credit and currency reform .
According to the American mutualist William Batchelder Greene , each worker in the mutualist system would receivejust and exact pay for his work ; services equivalent in cost being exchangeable for services equivalent in cost , without profit or discount . '
Mutualism has been retrospectively characterised as ideologically situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism .
Proudhon first characterised his goal as athird form of society , the synthesis of communism and property . '
Individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups , society , traditions , and ideological systems .
Individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict .
In 1793 , William Godwin , who has often been cited as the first anarchist , wrote Political Justice , which some consider the first expression of anarchism .
Godwin , a philosophical anarchist , from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a presentnecessary evilthat would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge .
Godwin advocated individualism , proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good .
An influential form of individualist anarchism , calledegoism , or egoist anarchism , was expounded by one of the earliest and bestknown proponents of individualist anarchism , the German Max Stirner .
Stirner's The Ego and Its Own , published in 1844 , is a founding text of the philosophy .
According to Stirner , the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire , without regard for God , state , or morality .
To Stirner , rights were spooks in the mind , and he held that society does not exist butthe individuals are its reality' .
Stirner advocated selfassertion and foresaw unions of egoists , nonsystematic associations continually renewed by all partiessupport through an act of will , which Stirner proposed as a form of organization in place of the state .
Egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals .
'Egoismhas inspired many interpretations of Stirner's philosophy .
It was rediscovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay .
Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist , and the fourpage weekly paper he edited during 1833 , The Peaceful Revolutionist , was the first anarchist periodical published .
For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette SchusterIt is apparentnbsp ; . . . that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrewsnbsp ; . . .
William B Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form . ' .
Henry David Thoreau was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the United States and Europe .
Thoreau was an American author , poet , naturalist , tax resister , development critic , surveyor , historian , philosopher , and leading transcendentalist .
He is best known for his books Walden , a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings , and his essay , Civil Disobedience , an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state .
Later Benjamin Tucker fused Stirner's egoism with the economics of Warren and Proudhon in his eclectic influential publication Liberty .
From these early influences individualist anarchism in different countries attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals , free love and birth control advocates , individualist naturists nudists , freethought and anticlearical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what became known as illegalism and individual reclamation .
These authors and activists included Oscar Wilde , Emile Armand , Han Ryner , Henri Zisly , Renzo Novatore , Miguel Gimenez Igualada , Adolf Brand and Lev Chernyi among others .
Social anarchism calls for a system with common ownership of means of production and democratic control of all organizations , without any government authority or coercion .
It is the largest school of thought in anarchism .
Social anarchism rejects private property , seeing it as a source of social inequality , and emphasises cooperation and mutual aid .
Collectivist anarchism , also referred to asrevolutionary socialismor a form of such , is a revolutionary form of anarchism , commonly associated with Mikhail Bakunin and Johann Most .
Collectivist anarchists oppose all private ownership of the means of production , instead advocating that ownership be collectivised .
This was to be achieved through violent revolution , first starting with a small cohesive group through acts of violence , or propaganda by the deed , which would inspire the workers as a whole to revolt and forcibly collectivise the means of production .
However , collectivization was not to be extended to the distribution of income , as workers would be paid according to time worked , rather than receiving goods being distributedaccording to needas in anarchocommunism .
This position was criticised by anarchist communists as effectivelyuphold the wages system' .
Collectivist anarchism arose contemporaneously with Marxism but opposed the Marxist dictatorship of the proletariat , despite the stated Marxist goal of a collectivist stateless society .
Anarchist , communist and collectivist ideas are not mutually exclusive ; although the collectivist anarchists advocated compensation for labour , some held out the possibility of a postrevolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need .
Anarchist communism is a theory of anarchism that advocates abolition of the state , markets , money , private property , and capitalism in favor of common ownership of the means of production , direct democracy and a horizontal network of voluntary associations and workers councils with production and consumption based on the guiding principle : from each according to his ability to each according to his need' .
Some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are strongly influenced by egoism and radical individualism , believing anarchocommunism is the best social system for the realization of individual freedom .
Most anarchocommunists view anarchocommunism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society .
Anarchocommunism developed out of radical socialist currents after the French revolution but was first formulated as such in the Italian section of the First International .
The theoretical work of Peter Kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed proorganizationalist and insurrectionary antiorganizationalist sections .
To date , the best known examples of an anarchist communist society , are the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution and the Free Territory during the Russian Revolution .
Through the efforts and influence of the Spanish Anarchists during the Spanish Revolution within the Spanish Civil War , starting in 1936 anarchist communism existed in most of Aragon , parts of the Levante and Andalusia , as well as in the stronghold of Anarchist Catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of the regime that won the war , Hitler , Mussolini , Spanish Communist Party repression as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the Spanish Republic itself .
During the Russian Revolution , anarchists such as Nestor Makhno worked to create and defendthrough the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraineanarchist communism in the Free Territory of the Ukraine from 1919 before being conquered by the Bolsheviks in 1921 .
Anarchosyndicalism is a branch of anarchism that focuses on the labor movement .
Anarchosyndicalists view labor unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change , replacing capitalism and the state with a new society democratically selfmanaged by workers .
The basic principles of anarchosyndicalism are : Workers , Direct action and Workers selfmanagement Anarchosyndicalists believe that only direct actionthat is , action concentrated on directly attaining a goal , as opposed to indirect action , such as electing a representative to a government positionwill allow workers to liberate themselves .
Moreover , anarchosyndicalists believe that workersorganizations should be selfmanaging .
They should not have bosses orbusiness agents' ; rather , the workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves .
Rudolf Rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarchosyndicalist movement .
He outlined a view of the origins of the movement , what it sought , and why it was important to the future of labor in his 1938 pamphlet AnarchoSyndicalism . The International Workers Association is an international anarchosyndicalist federation of various labor unions from different countries .
The Spanish Confederación Nacional del Trabajo played and still plays a major role in the Spanish labor movement .
It was also an important force in the Spanish Civil War .
Anarchism continues to generate many philosophies and movements , at times eclectic , drawing upon various sources , and syncretic , combining disparate concepts to create new philosophical approaches .
Green anarchism is a school of thought within anarchism that emphasizes environmental issues , with an important precedent in anarchonaturism , and whose main contemporary currents are anarchoprimitivism and social ecology .
Anarchafeminism combines anarchism with feminism .
It generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary coercive hierarchy that should be replaced by decentralized free association .
Anarchafeminists believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class struggle , and the anarchist struggle against the state .
In essence , the philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle and viceversa .
L Susan Brown claims thatas anarchism is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power , it is inherently feminist' .
Anarchafeminism began with the late 19th century writings of early feminist anarchists such as Emma Goldman and Voltairine de Cleyre .
Anarchopacifism is a tendency that rejects violence in the struggle for social change .
It developedmostly in the Netherlands , Britain , and the United States , before and during the Second World War' .
Christian anarchism is a movement in political theology that combines anarchism and Christianity .
Its main proponents included Leo Tolstoy , Dorothy Day , Ammon Hennacy , and Jacques Ellul .
Platformism is a tendency within the wider anarchist movement based on the organisational theories in the tradition of Dielo Truda's Organizational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists .
The document was based on the experiences of Russian anarchists in the 1917 October Revolution , which led eventually to the victory of the Bolsheviks over the anarchists and other groups .
The Platform attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement's failures during the Russian Revolution .
Synthesis anarchism is a form of anarchist organization that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives .
In the 1920s , this form found as its main proponents the anarchocommunists Voline and Sébastien Faure .
It is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global International of Anarchist Federations .
Postleft anarchy is a recent current in anarchist thought that promotes a critique of anarchism's relationship to traditional Leftwing politics .
Some postleftists seek to escape the confines of ideology in general also presenting a critique of organizations and morality .
Influenced by the work of Max Stirner and by the Marxist Situationist International , postleft anarchy is marked by a focus on social insurrection and a rejection of leftist social organisation .
Insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory , practice , and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasizes insurrection within anarchist practice .
It is critical of formal organizations such as labor unions and federations that are based on a political programme and periodic congresses .
Instead , insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organization and small affinity group based organization .
Insurrectionary anarchists put value in attack , permanent class conflict , and a refusal to negotiate or compromise with class enemies .
Postanarchism is a theoretical move towards a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought , drawing from diverse ideas including postmodernism , autonomist marxism , postleft anarchy , situationism , and postcolonialism .
Anarchocapitalism advocates the elimination of the state in favor of individual sovereignty in a free market .
Anarchocapitalism developed from radical antistate libertarianism and individualist anarchism , drawing from Austrian School economics , study of law and economics , and public choice theory .
There is a strong current within anarchism which does not consider that anarchocapitalism can be considered a part of the anarchist movement due to the fact that anarchism has historically been an anticapitalist movement and for definitional reasons which see anarchism incompatible with capitalist forms .
Anarchism is a philosophy that embodies many diverse attitudes , tendencies and schools of thought ; as such , disagreement over questions of values , ideology and tactics is common .
The compatibility of capitalism , nationalism , and religion with anarchism is widely disputed .
Similarly , anarchism enjoys complex relationships with ideologies such as Marxism , communism and capitalism .
Anarchists may be motivated by humanism , divine authority , enlightened selfinterest , veganism or any number of alternative ethical doctrines .
Phenomena such as civilization , technology , and the democratic process may be sharply criticized within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others .
On a tactical level , while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the 19th century , some contemporary anarchists espouse alternative direct action methods such as nonviolence , countereconomics and antistate cryptography to bring about an anarchist society .
About the scope of an anarchist society , some anarchists advocate a global one , while others do so by local ones .
The diversity in anarchism has led to widely different use of identical terms among different anarchist traditions , which has led to many definitional concerns in anarchist theory .
Intersecting and overlapping between various schools of thought , certain topics of interest and internal disputes have proven perennial within anarchist theory .
An important current within anarchism is free love .
Free love advocates sometimes traced their roots back to Josiah Warren and to experimental communities , viewed sexual freedom as a clear , direct expression of an individual's selfownership .
Free love particularly stressed womens rights since most sexual laws discriminated against women : for example , marriage laws and antibirth control measures .
The most important American free love journal was Lucifer the Lightbearer edited by Moses Harman and Lois Waisbrooker , but also there existed Ezra Heywood and Angela Heywood's The Word .
Free Society was a major anarchist newspaper in the United States at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries .
The publication advocated free love and womens rights , and critiquedComstockery'censorship of sexual information .
Also M E Lazarus was an important American individualist anarchist who promoted free love .
In New York City's Greenwich Village , bohemian feminists and socialists advocated selfrealisation and pleasure for women in the here and now .
They encouraged playing with sexual roles and sexuality , and the openly bisexual radical Edna St Vincent Millay and the lesbian anarchist Margaret Anderson were prominent among them .
Discussion groups organised by the Villagers were frequented by Emma Goldman , among others .
Magnus Hirschfeld noted in 1923 that Goldmanhas campaigned boldly and steadfastly for individual rights , and especially for those deprived of their rights .
Thus it came about that she was the first and only woman , indeed the first and only American , to take up the defense of homosexual love before the general public . '
In fact , before Goldman , heterosexual anarchist Robert Reitzel spoke positively of homosexuality from the beginning of the 1890s in his Detroitbased German language journal Der arme Teufel .
In Argentina anarchafeminist Virginia Bolten published the newspaper called , which was published nine times in Rosario between 8 January 1896 and 1 January 1897 , and was revived , briefly , in 1901 .
In Europe the main propagandist of free love within individualist anarchism was Emile Armand .
He proposed the concept of la camaraderie amoureuse to speak of free love as the possibility of voluntary sexual encounter between consenting adults .
He was also a consistent proponent of polyamory .
In Germany the stirnerists Adolf Brand and John Henry Mackay were pioneering campaigners for the acceptance of male bisexuality and homosexuality .
Mujeres Libres was an anarchist women's organization in Spain that aimed to empower working class women .
It was founded in 1936 by Lucía Sánchez Saornil , Mercedes Comaposada and Amparo Poch y Gascón and had approximately 30 , 000 members .
The organization was based on the idea of adouble strugglefor womens liberation and social revolution and argued that the two objectives were equally important and should be pursued in parallel .
In order to gain mutual support , they created networks of women anarchists .
Lucía Sánchez Saornil was a main founder of the Spanish anarchafeminist federation Mujeres Libres who was open about her lesbianism .
She was published in a variety of literary journals where working under a male pen name , she was able to explore lesbian themes at a time when homosexuality was criminalized and subject to censorship and punishment .
More recently , the British anarchopacifist Alex Comfort gained notoriety during the sexual revolution for writing the bestseller sex manual The Joy of Sex .
The issue of free love has a dedicated treatment in the work of French anarchohedonist philosopher Michel Onfray in such works as Théorie du corps amoureux : pour une érotique solaire and L'invention du plaisir : fragments cyréaniques .
For English anarchist William Godwin education wasthe main means by which change would be achieved . '
Godwin saw that the main goal of education should be the promotion of happiness .
For Godwin education had to haveA respect for the child's autonomy which precluded any form of coercion , 'A pedagogy that respected this and sought to build on the child's own motivation and initiatives , andA concern about the child's capacity to resist an ideology transmitted through the school . '
In his Political Justice he criticizes state sponsored schoolingon account of its obvious alliance with national government' .
Early American anarchist Josiah Warren advanced alternative education experiences in the libertarian communities he established .
Max Stirner wrote in 1842 a long essay on education called The False Principle of our Education .
In it Stirner names his educational principlepersonalist , explaining that selfunderstanding consists in hourly selfcreation .
Education for him is to createfree men , sovereign characters , by which he meanseternal charactersnbsp ; . . . who are therefore eternal because they form themselves each moment' .
In the United Statesfreethought was a basically antichristian , anticlerical movement , whose purpose was to make the individual politically and spiritually free to decide for himself on religious matters .
A number of contributors to Liberty were prominent figures in both freethought and anarchism .
The individualist anarchist George MacDonald was a coeditor of Freethought and , for a time , The Truth Seeker .
E . C .
Walker was coeditor of the excellent freethought free love journal Lucifer the LightBearer .
'Many of the anarchists were ardent freethinkers ; reprints from freethought papers such as Lucifer the LightBearer , Freethought and The Truth Seeker appeared in Liberty . . . nbsp ; The church was viewed as a common ally of the state and as a repressive force in and of itself' .
In 1901 , Catalan anarchist and freethinker Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia establishedmodernor progressive schools in Barcelona in defiance of an educational system controlled by the Catholic Church .
The schoolsstated goal was toeducate the working class in a rational , secular and noncoercive setting' .
Fiercely anticlerical , Ferrer believed infreedom in education' , education free from the authority of church and state .
Murray Bookchin wrote : This period was the heyday of libertarian schools and pedagogical projects in all areas of the country where Anarchists exercised some degree of influence .
Perhaps the bestknown effort in this field was Francisco Ferrer's Modern School , a project which exercised a considerable influence on Catalan education and on experimental techniques of teaching generally . '
La Escuela Moderna , and Ferrer's ideas generally , formed the inspiration for a series of Modern Schools in the United States , Cuba , South America and London .
The first of these was started in New York City in 1911 .
It also inspired the Italian newspaper Università popolare , founded in 1901 .
Russian christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy established a school for peasant children on his estate .
Tolstoy's educational experiments were shortlived due to harassment by the Tsarist secret police .
Tolstoy established a conceptual difference between education and culture .
He thought thatEducation is the tendency of one man to make another just like himselfnbsp ; . . .
Education is culture under restraint , culture is free .
when the teaching is forced upon the pupil , and when then instruction is exclusive , that is when only those subjects are taught which the educator regards as necessary' .
For himwithout compulsion , education was transformed into culture' .
A more recent libertarian tradition on education is that of unschooling and the free school in which childled activity replaces pedagogic approaches .
Experiments in Germany led to A S Neill founding what became Summerhill School in 1921 .
Summerhill is often cited as an example of anarchism in practice .
However , although Summerhill and other free schools are radically libertarian , they differ in principle from those of Ferrer by not advocating an overtly political class struggleapproach .
In addition to organizing schools according to libertarian principles , anarchists have also questioned the concept of schooling per se .
The term deschooling was popularized by Ivan Illich , who argued that the school as an institution is dysfunctional for selfdetermined learning and serves the creation of a consumer society instead .
Criticisms of anarchism include moral criticisms and pragmatic criticisms .
Anarchism is often evaluated as unfeasible or utopian by its critics .
European history professor Carl Landauer , in his book European Socialism argued that social anarchism is unrealistic and that government is alesser evilthan a society withoutrepressive force . '
He also argued thatill intentions will cease if repressive force disappearsis anabsurdity . '
The anarchist tendency known as platformism has been criticized by Situationists , insurrectionaries , synthesis anarchists , and others of preserving tacitly statist , authoritarian or bureaucratic tendencies .
See List of films dealing with Anarchism
Autism is a disorder of neural development characterized by impaired social interaction and verbal and nonverbal communication , and by restricted , repetitive or stereotyped behavior .
The diagnostic criteria require that symptoms become apparent before a child is three years old .
Autism affects information processing in the brain by altering how nerve cells and their synapses connect and organize ; how this occurs is not well understood .
It is one of three recognized disorders in the autism spectrum , the other two being Asperger syndrome , which lacks delays in cognitive development and language , and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified , which is diagnosed when the full set of criteria for autism or Asperger syndrome are not met .
Autism has a strong genetic basis , although the genetics of autism are complex and it is unclear whether ASD is explained more by rare mutations , or by rare combinations of common genetic variants .
In rare cases , autism is strongly associated with agents that cause birth defects .
Controversies surround other proposed environmental causes , such as heavy metals , pesticides or childhood vaccines ; the vaccine hypotheses are biologically implausible and lack convincing scientific evidence .
The prevalence of autism is about 12 per 1 , 000 people worldwide , and it occurs about four times more often in boys than girls .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report 20 per 1 , 000 children in the United States are diagnosed with ASD , up from 11 per 1 , 000 in 2008 .
The number of people diagnosed with autism has been increasing dramatically since the 1980s , partly due to changes in diagnostic practice and governmentsubsidized financial incentives for named diagnoses ; the question of whether actual prevalence has increased is unresolved .
Parents usually notice signs in the first two years of their child's life .
The signs usually develop gradually , but some autistic children first develop more normally and then regress .
Early behavioral , cognitive , or speech interventions can help autistic children gain selfcare , social , and communication skills .
Although there is no known cure , there have been reported cases of children who recovered .
Not many children with autism live independently after reaching adulthood , though some become successful .
An autistic culture has developed , with some individuals seeking a cure and others believing autism should be accepted as a difference and not treated as a disorder .
Autism is a highly variable neurodevelopmental disorder that first appears during infancy or childhood , and generally follows a steady course without remission .
Overt symptoms gradually begin after the age of six months , become established by age two or three years , and tend to continue through adulthood , although often in more muted form .
It is distinguished not by a single symptom , but by a characteristic triad of symptoms : impairments in social interaction ; impairments in communication ; and restricted interests and repetitive behavior .
Other aspects , such as atypical eating , are also common but are not essential for diagnosis .
Autism's individual symptoms occur in the general population and appear not to associate highly , without a sharp line separating pathologically severe from common traits .
Social deficits distinguish autism and the related autism spectrum disorders from other developmental disorders .
People with autism have social impairments and often lack the intuition about others that many people take for granted .
Noted autistic Temple Grandin described her inability to understand the social communication of neurotypicals , or people with normal neural development , as leaving her feelinglike an anthropologist on Mars' .
Unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood .
Autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli , smile and look at others less often , and respond less to their own name .
Autistic toddlers differ more strikingly from social norms ; for example , they have less eye contact and turn taking , and do not have the ability to use simple movements to express themselves , such as the deficiency to point at things .
Three to fiveyearold autistic children are less likely to exhibit social understanding , approach others spontaneously , imitate and respond to emotions , communicate nonverbally , and take turns with others .
However , they do form attachments to their primary caregivers .
Most autistic children display moderately less attachment security than nonautistic children , although this difference disappears in children with higher mental development or less severe ASD .
Older children and adults with ASD perform worse on tests of face and emotion recognition .
Children with highfunctioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to nonautistic peers , despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone .
Making and maintaining friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism .
For them , the quality of friendships , not the number of friends , predicts how lonely they feel .
Functional friendships , such as those resulting in invitations to parties , may affect the quality of life more deeply .
There are many anecdotal reports , but few systematic studies , of aggression and violence in individuals with ASD .
The limited data suggest that , in children with intellectual disability , autism is associated with aggression , destruction of property , and tantrums .
A 2007 study interviewed parents of 67 children with ASD and reported that about twothirds of the children had periods of severe tantrums and about onethird had a history of aggression , with tantrums significantly more common than in nonautistic children with language impairments .
A 2008 Swedish study found that , of individuals aged 15 or older discharged from hospital with a diagnosis of ASD , those who committed violent crimes were significantly more likely to have other psychopathological conditions such as psychosis .
About a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs .
Differences in communication may be present from the first year of life , and may include delayed onset of babbling , unusual gestures , diminished responsiveness , and vocal patterns that are not synchronized with the caregiver .
In the second and third years , autistic children have less frequent and less diverse babbling , consonants , words , and word combinations ; their gestures are less often integrated with words .
Autistic children are less likely to make requests or share experiences , and are more likely to simply repeat otherswords or reverse pronouns .
Joint attention seems to be necessary for functional speech , and deficits in joint attention seem to distinguish infants with ASD : for example , they may look at a pointing hand instead of the pointedat object , and they consistently fail to point at objects in order to comment on or share an experience .
Autistic children may have difficulty with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language .
In a pair of studies , highfunctioning autistic children aged 815 performed equally well as , and adults better than , individually matched controls at basic language tasks involving vocabulary and spelling .
Both autistic groups performed worse than controls at complex language tasks such as figurative language , comprehension and inference .
As people are often sized up initially from their basic language skills , these studies suggest that people speaking to autistic individuals are more likely to overestimate what their audience comprehends .
Autistic individuals display many forms of repetitive or restricted behavior , which the Repetitive Behavior ScaleRevised categorizes as follows .
No single repetitive or selfinjurious behavior seems to be specific to autism , but only autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors .
Autistic individuals may have symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis , but that can affect the individual or the family .
An estimated 0 . 5 to 10 of individuals with ASD show unusual abilities , ranging from splinter skills such as the memorization of trivia to the extraordinarily rare talents of prodigious autistic savants .
Many individuals with ASD show superior skills in perception and attention , relative to the general population .
Sensory abnormalities are found in over 90 of those with autism , and are considered core features by some , although there is no good evidence that sensory symptoms differentiate autism from other developmental disorders .
Differences are greater for underresponsivity than for overresponsivity or for sensation seeking .
An estimated 6080 of autistic people have motor signs that include poor muscle tone , poor motor planning , and toe walking ; deficits in motor coordination are pervasive across ASD and are greater in autism proper .
Unusual eating behavior occurs in about threequarters of children with ASD , to the extent that it was formerly a diagnostic indicator .
Selectivity is the most common problem , although eating rituals and food refusal also occur ; this does not appear to result in malnutrition .
Although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal symptoms , there is a lack of published rigorous data to support the theory that autistic children have more or different GI symptoms than usual ; studies report conflicting results , and the relationship between GI problems and ASD is unclear .
Parents of children with ASD have higher levels of stress .
Siblings of children with ASD report greater admiration of and less conflict with the affected sibling than siblings of unaffected children and were similar to siblings of children with Down syndrome in these aspects of the sibling relationship .
However , they reported lower levels of closeness and intimacy than siblings of children with Down syndrome ; siblings of individuals with ASD have greater risk of negative wellbeing and poorer sibling relationships as adults .
It has long been presumed that there is a common cause at the genetic , cognitive , and neural levels for autism's characteristic triad of symptoms .
However , there is increasing suspicion that autism is instead a complex disorder whose core aspects have distinct causes that often cooccur .
Autism has a strong genetic basis , although the genetics of autism are complex and it is unclear whether ASD is explained more by rare mutations with major effects , or by rare multigene interactions of common genetic variants .
Complexity arises due to interactions among multiple genes , the environment , and epigenetic factors which do not change DNA but are heritable and influence gene expression .
Studies of twins suggest that heritability is 0 . 7 for autism and as high as 0 . 9 for ASD , and siblings of those with autism are about 25 times more likely to be autistic than the general population .
However , most of the mutations that increase autism risk have not been identified .
Typically , autism cannot be traced to a Mendelian mutation or to a single chromosome abnormality , and none of the genetic syndromes associated with ASDs have been shown to selectively cause ASD .
Numerous candidate genes have been located , with only small effects attributable to any particular gene .
The large number of autistic individuals with unaffected family members may result from copy number variationsspontaneous deletions or duplications in genetic material during meiosis .
Hence , a substantial fraction of autism cases may be traceable to genetic causes that are highly heritable but not inherited : that is , the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parental genome .
Several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism .
Some rare mutations may lead to autism by disrupting some synaptic pathways , such as those involved with cell adhesion .
Gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activitydependent changes .
All known teratogens related to the risk of autism appear to act during the first eight weeks from conception , and though this does not exclude the possibility that autism can be initiated or affected later , it is strong evidence that autism arises very early in development .
Although evidence for other environmental causes is anecdotal and has not been confirmed by reliable studies , extensive searches are underway .
Environmental factors that have been claimed to contribute to or exacerbate autism , or may be important in future research , include certain foods , infectious disease , heavy metals , solvents , diesel exhaust , PCBs , phthalates and phenols used in plastic products , pesticides , brominated flame retardants , alcohol , smoking , illicit drugs , vaccines , and prenatal stress , although no links have been found , and some have been completely disproven .
Parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vaccination .
This has led to unsupported theories blaming vaccine overload , a vaccine preservative , or the MMR vaccine for causing autism .
The latter theory was supported by a litigationfunded study that has since been shown to have beenan elaborate fraud' .
Although these theories lack convincing scientific evidence and are biologically implausible , parental concern about a potential vaccine link with autism has led to lower rates of childhood immunizations , outbreaks of previously controlled childhood diseases in some countries , and the preventable deaths of several children .
Autism's symptoms result from maturationrelated changes in various systems of the brain .
How autism occurs is not well understood .
Its mechanism can be divided into two areas : the pathophysiology of brain structures and processes associated with autism , and the neuropsychological linkages between brain structures and behaviors .
The behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysiologies .
Unlike many other brain disorders , such as Parkinsons , autism does not have a clear unifying mechanism at either the molecular , cellular , or systems level ; it is not known whether autism is a few disorders caused by mutations converging on a few common molecular pathways , or is a large set of disorders with diverse mechanisms .
Autism appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems , and to disturb the timing of brain development more than the final product .
Neuroanatomical studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that autism's mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception .
This anomaly appears to start a cascade of pathological events in the brain that are significantly influenced by environmental factors .
Just after birth , the brains of autistic children tend to grow faster than usual , followed by normal or relatively slower growth in childhood .
It is not known whether early overgrowth occurs in all autistic children .
It seems to be most prominent in brain areas underlying the development of higher cognitive specialization .
Hypotheses for the cellular and molecular bases of pathological early overgrowth include the following : Interactions between the immune system and the nervous system begin early during the embryonic stage of life , and successful neurodevelopment depends on a balanced immune response .
Aberrant immune activity during critical periods of neurodevelopment is possibly part of the mechanism of some forms of ASD .
Although some abnormalities in the immune system have been found in specific subgroups of autistic individuals , it is not known whether these abnormalities are relevant to or secondary to autism's disease processes .
As autoantibodies are found in conditions other than ASD , and are not always present in ASD , the relationship between immune disturbances and autism remains unclear and controversial .
The relationship of neurochemicals to autism is not well understood ; several have been investigated , with the most evidence for the role of serotonin and of genetic differences in its transport .
The role of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors in the pathogenesis of fragile X syndrome , the most common identified genetic cause of autism , has led to interest in the possible implications for future autism research into this pathway .
Some data suggest an increase in several growth hormones ; other data argue for diminished growth factors .
Also , some inborn errors of metabolism are associated with autism , but probably account for less than 5 of cases .
The mirror neuron system theory of autism hypothesizes that distortion in the development of the MNS interferes with imitation and leads to autism's core features of social impairment and communication difficulties .
The MNS operates when an animal performs an action or observes another animal perform the same action .
The MNS may contribute to an individual's understanding of other people by enabling the modeling of their behavior via embodied simulation of their actions , intentions , and emotions .
Several studies have tested this hypothesis by demonstrating structural abnormalities in MNS regions of individuals with ASD , delay in the activation in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with Asperger syndrome , and a correlation between reduced MNS activity and severity of the syndrome in children with ASD .
However , individuals with autism also have abnormal brain activation in many circuits outside the MNS and the MNS theory does not explain the normal performance of autistic children on imitation tasks that involve a goal or object .
ASDrelated patterns of low function and aberrant activation in the brain differ depending on whether the brain is doing social or nonsocial tasks .
In autism there is evidence for reduced functional connectivity of the default network , a largescale brain network involved in social and emotional processing , with intact connectivity of the taskpositive network , used in sustained attention and goaldirected thinking .
In people with autism the two networks are not negatively correlated in time , suggesting an imbalance in toggling between the two networks , possibly reflecting a disturbance of selfreferential thought .
A 2008 brainimaging study found a specific pattern of signals in the cingulate cortex which differs in individuals with ASD .
The underconnectivity theory of autism hypothesizes that autism is marked by underfunctioning highlevel neural connections and synchronization , along with an excess of lowlevel processes .
Evidence for this theory has been found in functional neuroimaging studies on autistic individuals and by a brainwave study that suggested that adults with ASD have local overconnectivity in the cortex and weak functional connections between the frontal lobe and the rest of the cortex .
Other evidence suggests the underconnectivity is mainly within each hemisphere of the cortex and that autism is a disorder of the association cortex .
From studies based on eventrelated potentials , transient changes to the brain's electrical activity in response to stimuli , there is considerable evidence for differences in autistic individuals with respect to attention , orientiation to auditory and visual stimuli , novelty detection , language and face processing , and information storage ; several studies have found a preference for nonsocial stimuli .
For example , magnetoencephalography studies have found evidence in autistic children of delayed responses in the brain's processing of auditory signals .
In the genetic area , relations have been found between autism and schizophrenia based on duplications and deletions of chromosomes ; research showed that schizophrenia and autism are significantly more common in combination with 1q211 deletion syndrome .
Research on autismschizophrenia relations for chromosome 15 , chromosome 16 and chromosome 17 are inconclusive .
Two major categories of cognitive theories have been proposed about the links between autistic brains and behavior .
The first category focuses on deficits in social cognition .
Simon BaronCohen's empathizingsystemizing theory postulates that autistic individuals can systemizethat is , they can develop internal rules of operation to handle events inside the brainbut are less effective at empathizing by handling events generated by other agents .
An extension , the extreme male brain theory , hypothesizes that autism is an extreme case of the male brain , defined psychometrically as individuals in whom systemizing is better than empathizing .
These theories are somewhat related to BaronCohen's earlier theory of mind approach , which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from an inability to ascribe mental states to oneself and others .
The theory of mind hypothesis is supported by autistic children's atypical responses to the SallyAnne test for reasoning about othersmotivations , and the mirror neuron system theory of autism described in Pathophysiology maps well to the hypothesis .
However , most studies have found no evidence of impairment in autistic individualsability to understand other people's basic intentions or goals ; instead , data suggests that impairments are found in understanding more complex social emotions or in considering othersviewpoints .
The second category focuses on nonsocial or general processing : the executive functions such as working memory , planning , inhibition .
In his review , Kenworthy states thatthe claim of executive dysfunction as a causal factor in autism is controversial' , however , it is clear that executive dysfunction plays a role in the social and cognitive deficits observed in individuals with autism' .
Tests of core executive processes such as eye movement tasks indicate improvement from late childhood to adolescence , but performance never reaches typical adult levels .
A strength of the theory is predicting stereotyped behavior and narrow interests ; two weaknesses are that executive function is hard to measure and that executive function deficits have not been found in young autistic children .
Weak central coherence theory hypothesizes that a limited ability to see the big picture underlies the central disturbance in autism .
One strength of this theory is predicting special talents and peaks in performance in autistic people .
A related theoryenhanced perceptual functioningfocuses more on the superiority of locally oriented and perceptual operations in autistic individuals .
These theories map well from the underconnectivity theory of autism .
Neither category is satisfactory on its own ; social cognition theories poorly address autism's rigid and repetitive behaviors , while the nonsocial theories have difficulty explaining social impairment and communication difficulties .
A combined theory based on multiple deficits may prove to be more useful .
Diagnosis is based on behavior , not cause or mechanism .
Autism is defined in the DSMIVTR as exhibiting at least six symptoms total , including at least two symptoms of qualitative impairment in social interaction , at least one symptom of qualitative impairment in communication , and at least one symptom of restricted and repetitive behavior .
Sample symptoms include lack of social or emotional reciprocity , stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language , and persistent preoccupation with parts of objects .
Onset must be prior to age three years , with delays or abnormal functioning in either social interaction , language as used in social communication , or symbolic or imaginative play .
The disturbance must not be better accounted for by Rett syndrome or childhood disintegrative disorder .
ICD10 uses essentially the same definition .
Several diagnostic instruments are available .
Two are commonly used in autism research : the Autism Diagnostic InterviewRevised is a semistructured parent interview , and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule uses observation and interaction with the child .
The Childhood Autism Rating Scale is used widely in clinical environments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children .
A pediatrician commonly performs a preliminary investigation by taking developmental history and physically examining the child .
If warranted , diagnosis and evaluations are conducted with help from ASD specialists , observing and assessing cognitive , communication , family , and other factors using standardized tools , and taking into account any associated medical conditions .
A pediatric neuropsychologist is often asked to assess behavior and cognitive skills , both to aid diagnosis and to help recommend educational interventions .
A differential diagnosis for ASD at this stage might also consider intellectual disability , hearing impairment , and a specific language impairment such as LandauKleffner syndrome .
The presence of autism can make it harder to diagnose coexisting psychiatric disorders such as depression .
Clinical genetics evaluations are often done once ASD is diagnosed , particularly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause .
Although genetic technology allows clinical geneticists to link an estimated 40 of cases to genetic causes , consensus guidelines in the US and UK are limited to highresolution chromosome and fragile X testing .
A genotypefirst model of diagnosis has been proposed , which would routinely assess the genome's copy number variations .
As new genetic tests are developed several ethical , legal , and social issues will emerge .
Commercial availability of tests may precede adequate understanding of how to use test results , given the complexity of autism's genetics .
Metabolic and neuroimaging tests are sometimes helpful , but are not routine .
ASD can sometimes be diagnosed by age 14 months , although diagnosis becomes increasingly stable over the first three years of life : for example , a oneyearold who meets diagnostic criteria for ASD is less likely than a threeyearold to continue to do so a few years later .
In the UK the National Autism Plan for Children recommends at most 30 weeks from first concern to completed diagnosis and assessment , though few cases are handled that quickly in practice .
A 2009 US study found the average age of formal ASD diagnosis was 5 . 7 years , far above recommendations , and that 27 of children remained undiagnosed at age 8 years .
Although the symptoms of autism and ASD begin early in childhood , they are sometimes missed ; years later , adults may seek diagnoses to help them or their friends and family understand themselves , to help their employers make adjustments , or in some locations to claim disability living allowances or other benefits .
Underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis are problems in marginal cases , and much of the recent increase in the number of reported ASD cases is likely due to changes in diagnostic practices .
The increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has given providers incentives to diagnose ASD , resulting in some overdiagnosis of children with uncertain symptoms .
Conversely , the cost of screening and diagnosis and the challenge of obtaining payment can inhibit or delay diagnosis .
It is particularly hard to diagnose autism among the visually impaired , partly because some of its diagnostic criteria depend on vision , and partly because autistic symptoms overlap with those of common blindness syndromes or blindisms .
Autism is one of the five pervasive developmental disorders , which are characterized by widespread abnormalities of social interactions and communication , and severely restricted interests and highly repetitive behavior .
These symptoms do not imply sickness , fragility , or emotional disturbance .
Of the five PDD forms , Asperger syndrome is closest to autism in signs and likely causes ; Rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder share several signs with autism , but may have unrelated causes ; PDD not otherwise specified is diagnosed when the criteria are not met for a more specific disorder .
Unlike with autism , people with Asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development .
The terminology of autism can be bewildering , with autism , Asperger syndrome and PDDNOS often called the autism spectrum disorders or sometimes the autistic disorders , whereas autism itself is often called autistic disorder , childhood autism , or infantile autism .
In this article , autism refers to the classic autistic disorder ; in clinical practice , though , autism , ASD , and PDD are often used interchangeably .
ASD , in turn , is a subset of the broader autism phenotype , which describes individuals who may not have ASD but do have autisticlike traits , such as avoiding eye contact .
The manifestations of autism cover a wide spectrum , ranging from individuals with severe impairmentswho may be silent , mentally disabled , and locked into hand flapping and rockingto high functioning individuals who may have active but distinctly odd social approaches , narrowly focused interests , and verbose , pedantic communication .
Because the behavior spectrum is continuous , boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily somewhat arbitrary .
Sometimes the syndrome is divided into low , medium or highfunctioning autism , based on IQ thresholds , or on how much support the individual requires in daily life ; these subdivisions are not standardized and are controversial .
Autism can also be divided into syndromal and nonsyndromal autism ; the syndromal autism is associated with severe or profound intellectual disability or a congenital syndrome with physical symptoms , such as tuberous sclerosis .
Although individuals with Asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism , the extent of the overlap between Asperger syndrome HFA and nonsyndromal autism is unclear .
Some studies have reported diagnoses of autism in children due to a loss of language or social skills , as opposed to a failure to make progress , typically from 15 to 30 months of age .
The validity of this distinction remains controversial ; it is possible that regressive autism is a specific subtype , or that there is a continuum of behaviors between autism with and without regression .
Research into causes has been hampered by the inability to identify biologically meaningful subgroups within the autistic population and by the traditional boundaries between the disciplines of psychiatry , psychology , neurology and pediatrics .
Newer technologies such as fMRI and diffusion tensor imaging can help identify biologically relevant phenotypes that can be viewed on brain scans , to help further neurogenetic studies of autism ; one example is lowered activity in the fusiform face area of the brain , which is associated with impaired perception of people versus objects .
It has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior .
About half of parents of children with ASD notice their child's unusual behaviors by age 18 months , and about fourfifths notice by age 24 months .
According to an article in the Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , failure to meet any of the following milestonesis an absolute indication to proceed with further evaluations .
Delay in referral for such testing may delay early diagnosis and treatment and affect the longterm outcome' .
US and Japanese practice is to screen all children for ASD at 18 and 24 months , using autismspecific formal screening tests .
In contrast , in the UK , children whose families or doctors recognize possible signs of autism are screened .
It is not known which approach is more effective .
Screening tools include the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers , the Early Screening of Autistic Traits Questionnaire , and the First Year Inventory ; initial data on MCHAT and its predecessor CHAT on children aged 1830 months suggests that it is best used in a clinical setting and that it has low sensitivity but good specificity .
It may be more accurate to precede these tests with a broadband screener that does not distinguish ASD from other developmental disorders .
Screening tools designed for one culture's norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture .
Although genetic screening for autism is generally still impractical , it can be considered in some cases , such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic features .
The main goals when treating children with autism are to lessen associated deficits and family distress , and to increase quality of life and functional independence .
No single treatment is best and treatment is typically tailored to the child's needs .
Families and the educational system are the main resources for treatment .
Studies of interventions have methodological problems that prevent definitive conclusions about efficacy .
Although many psychosocial interventions have some positive evidence , suggesting that some form of treatment is preferable to no treatment , the methodological quality of systematic reviews of these studies has generally been poor , their clinical results are mostly tentative , and there is little evidence for the relative effectiveness of treatment options .
Intensive , sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children acquire selfcare , social , and job skills , and often improve functioning and decrease symptom severity and maladaptive behaviors ; claims that intervention by around age three years is crucial are not substantiated .
Available approaches include applied behavior analysis , developmental models , structured teaching , speech and language therapy , social skills therapy , and occupational therapy .
There is some evidence that early intensive behavioral intervention , an early intervention model for 20 to 40 hours a week for multiple years , is an effective behavioral treatment for some children with ASD .
Educational interventions can be effective to varying degrees in most children : intensive ABA treatment has demonstrated effectiveness in enhancing global functioning in preschool children and is wellestablished for improving intellectual performance of young children .
Neuropsychological reports are often poorly communicated to educators , resulting in a gap between what a report recommends and what education is provided .
It is not known whether treatment programs for children lead to significant improvements after the children grow up , and the limited research on the effectiveness of adult residential programs shows mixed results .
The appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers .
Many medications are used to treat ASD symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails .
More than half of US children diagnosed with ASD are prescribed psychoactive drugs or anticonvulsants , with the most common drug classes being antidepressants , stimulants , and antipsychotics .
Aside from antipsychotics , there is scant reliable research about the effectiveness or safety of drug treatments for adolescents and adults with ASD .
A person with ASD may respond atypically to medications , the medications can have adverse effects , and no known medication relieves autism's core symptoms of social and communication impairments .
Experiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replacing or modulating gene function , suggesting the possibility of targeting therapies to specific rare mutations known to cause autism .
Although many alternative therapies and interventions are available , few are supported by scientific studies .
Treatment approaches have little empirical support in qualityoflife contexts , and many programs focus on success measures that lack predictive validity and realworld relevance .
Scientific evidence appears to matter less to service providers than program marketing , training availability , and parent requests .
Some alternative treatments may place the child at risk .
A 2008 study found that compared to their peers , autistic boys have significantly thinner bones if on caseinfree diets ; in 2005 , botched chelation therapy killed a fiveyearold child with autism .
Treatment is expensive ; indirect costs are more so .
For someone born in 2000 , a US study estimated an average lifetime cost of , with about 10 medical care , 30 extra education and other care , and 60 lost economic productivity .
Publicly supported programs are often inadequate or inappropriate for a given child , and unreimbursed outofpocket medical or therapy expenses are associated with likelihood of family financial problems ; one 2008 US study found a 14 average loss of annual income in families of children with ASD , and a related study found that ASD is associated with higher probability that child care problems will greatly affect parental employment .
US states increasingly require private health insurance to cover autism services , shifting costs from publicly funded education programs to privately funded health insurance .
After childhood , key treatment issues include residential care , job training and placement , sexuality , social skills , and estate planning .
There is no known cure .
Children recover occasionally , so that they lose their diagnosis of ASD ; this occurs sometimes after intensive treatment and sometimes not .
It is not known how often recovery happens ; reported rates in unselected samples of children with ASD have ranged from 3 to 25 .
Most autistic children can acquire language by age 5 or younger , though a few have developed communication skills in later years .
Most children with autism lack social support , meaningful relationships , future employment opportunities or selfdetermination .
Although core difficulties tend to persist , symptoms often become less severe with age .
Few highquality studies address longterm prognosis .
Some adults show modest improvement in communication skills , but a few decline ; no study has focused on autism after midlife .
Acquiring language before age six , having an IQ above 50 , and having a marketable skill all predict better outcomes ; independent living is unlikely with severe autism .
A 2004 British study of 68 adults who were diagnosed before 1980 as autistic children with IQ above 50 found that 12 achieved a high level of independence as adults , 10 had some friends and were generally in work but required some support , 19 had some independence but were generally living at home and needed considerable support and supervision in daily living , 46 needed specialist residential provision from facilities specializing in ASD with a high level of support and very limited autonomy , and 12 needed highlevel hospital care .
A 2005 Swedish study of 78 adults that did not exclude low IQ found worse prognosis ; for example , only 4 achieved independence .
A 2008 Canadian study of 48 young adults diagnosed with ASD as preschoolers found outcomes ranging through poor , fair , good , and very good ; 56 of these young adults had been employed at some point during their lives , mostly in volunteer , sheltered or parttime work .
Changes in diagnostic practice and increased availability of effective early intervention make it unclear whether these findings can be generalized to recently diagnosed children .
Most recent reviews tend to estimate a prevalence of 12 per 1 , 000 for autism and close to 6 per 1 , 000 for ASD , and 11 per 1 , 000 children in the United States for ASD as of 2008 ; because of inadequate data , these numbers may underestimate ASD's true prevalence .
PDDNOS's prevalence has been estimated at 3 . 7 per 1 , 000 , Asperger syndrome at roughly 0 . 6 per 1 , 000 , and childhood disintegrative disorder at 0 . 02 per 1 , 000 .
The number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the 1990s and early 2000s .
This increase is largely attributable to changes in diagnostic practices , referral patterns , availability of services , age at diagnosis , and public awareness , though unidentified environmental risk factors cannot be ruled out .
The available evidence does not rule out the possibility that autism's true prevalence has increased ; a real increase would suggest directing more attention and funding toward changing environmental factors instead of continuing to focus on genetics .
Boys are at higher risk for ASD than girls .
The sex ratio averages 4 . 3 : 1 and is greatly modified by cognitive impairment : it may be close to 2 : 1 with intellectual disability and more than 5 . 5 : 1 without .
Several theories about the higher prevalence in males have been investigated , but the cause of the difference is unconfirmed .
Although the evidence does not implicate any single pregnancyrelated risk factor as a cause of autism , the risk of autism is associated with advanced age in either parent , and with diabetes , bleeding , and use of psychiatric drugs in the mother during pregnancy .
The risk is greater with older fathers than with older mothers ; two potential explanations are the known increase in mutation burden in older sperm , and the hypothesis that men marry later if they carry genetic liability and show some signs of autism .
Most professionals believe that race , ethnicity , and socioeconomic background do not affect the occurrence of autism .
Several other conditions are common in children with autism .
They include : A few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named .
The Table Talk of Martin Luther , compiled by his notetaker , Mathesius , contains the story of a 12yearold boy who may have been severely autistic .
Luther reportedly thought the boy was a soulless mass of flesh possessed by the devil , and suggested that he be suffocated , although a later critic has cast doubt on the veracity of this report .
The earliest welldocumented case of autism is that of Hugh Blair of Borgue , as detailed in a 1747 court case in which his brother successfully petitioned to annul Blair's marriage to gain Blair's inheritance .
The Wild Boy of Aveyron , a feral child caught in 1798 , showed several signs of autism ; the medical student Jean Itard treated him with a behavioral program designed to help him form social attachments and to induce speech via imitation .
The New Latin word autismus was coined by the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler in 1910 as he was defining symptoms of schizophrenia .
He derived it from the Greek word autós , and used it to mean morbid selfadmiration , referring toautistic withdrawal of the patient to his fantasies , against which any influence from outside becomes an intolerable disturbance' .
The word autism first took its modern sense in 1938 when Hans Asperger of the Vienna University Hospital adopted Bleuler's terminology autistic psychopaths in a lecture in German about child psychology .
Asperger was investigating an ASD now known as Asperger syndrome , though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until 1981 .
Leo Kanner of the Johns Hopkins Hospital first used autism in its modern sense in English when he introduced the label early infantile autism in a 1943 report of 11 children with striking behavioral similarities .
Almost all the characteristics described in Kanner's first paper on the subject , notablyautistic alonenessandinsistence on sameness' , are still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders .
It is not known whether Kanner derived the term independently of Asperger .
Kanner's reuse of autism led to decades of confused terminology like infantile schizophrenia , and child psychiatry's focus on maternal deprivation led to misconceptions of autism as an infant's response torefrigerator mothers' .
Starting in the late 1960s autism was established as a separate syndrome by demonstrating that it is lifelong , distinguishing it from intellectual disability and schizophrenia and from other developmental disorders , and demonstrating the benefits of involving parents in active programs of therapy .
As late as the mid1970s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism ; now it is thought to be one of the most heritable of all psychiatric conditions .
Although the rise of parent organizations and the destigmatization of childhood ASD have deeply affected how we view ASD , parents continue to feel social stigma in situations where their autistic children's behaviors are perceived negatively by others , and many primary care physicians and medical specialists still express some beliefs consistent with outdated autism research .
The Internet has helped autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find so hard to deal with , and has given them a way to form online communities and work remotely .
Sociological and cultural aspects of autism have developed : some in the community seek a cure , while others believe that autism is simply another way of being .
Albedo , or reflection coefficient , derived from Latin albedowhiteness in turn from albuswhite , is the diffuse reflectivity or reflecting power of a surface .
It is the ratio of reflected radiation from the surface to incident radiation upon it .
Its dimensionless nature lets it be expressed as a percentage and is measured on a scale from zero for no reflection of a perfectly black surface to 1 for perfect reflection of a white surface .
Albedo depends on the frequency of the radiation .
When quoted unqualified , it usually refers to some appropriate average across the spectrum of visible light .
In general , the albedo depends on the directional distribution of incident radiation , except for Lambertian surfaces , which scatter radiation in all directions according to a cosine function and therefore have an albedo that is independent of the incident distribution .
In practice , a bidirectional reflectance distribution function may be required to accurately characterize the scattering properties of a surface , but albedo is very useful as a first approximation .
The albedo is an important concept in climatology , astronomy , and calculating reflectivity of surfaces in LEED sustainablerating systems for buildings .
The average overall albedo of Earth , its planetary albedo , is 30 to 35 because of cloud cover , but widely varies locally across the surface because of different geological and environmental features .
The term was introduced into optics by Johann Heinrich Lambert in his 1760 work Photometria .
Albedos of typical materials in visible light range from up to 0 . 9 for fresh snow to about 0 . 04 for charcoal , one of the darkest substances .
Deeply shadowed cavities can achieve an effective albedo approaching the zero of a black body .
When seen from a distance , the ocean surface has a low albedo , as do most forests , whereas desert areas have some of the highest albedos among landforms .
Most land areas are in an albedo range of 0 . 1 to 0 . 4 .
The average albedo of the Earth is about 0 . 3 .
This is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds .
The Earth's surface albedo is regularly estimated via Earth observation satellite sensors such as NASA's MODIS instruments on board the Terra and Aqua satellites .
As the total amount of reflected radiation cannot be directly measured by satellite , a mathematical model of the BRDF is used to translate a sample set of satellite reflectance measurements into estimates of directionalhemispherical reflectance and bihemispherical reflectance .
The Earth's average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about 15nbsp ; C .
If the Earth was frozen entirely the average temperature of the planet would drop below 40nbsp ; C If only the continental land masses became covered by glaciers , the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about 0nbsp ; C .
In contrast , if all the ice on Earth were to melta socalled aquaplanetthe average temperature on the planet would rise to just under 27nbsp ; C .
It has been shown that for many applications involving terrestrial albedo , the albedo at a particular solar zenith angle θ can reasonably be approximated by the proportionate sum of two terms : the directionalhemispherical reflectance at that solar zenith angle , , and the bihemispherical reflectance , the proportion concerned being defined as the proportion of diffuse illumination .
Albedo can then be given as : Directionalhemispherical reflectance is sometimes referred to as blacksky albedo and bihemispherical reflectance as whitesky albedo .
These terms are important because they allow the albedo to be calculated for any given illumination conditions from a knowledge of the intrinsic properties of the surface .
The albedos of planets , satellites and asteroids can be used to infer much about their properties .
The study of albedos , their dependence on wavelength , lighting angle , and variation in time comprises a major part of the astronomical field of photometry .
For small and far objects that cannot be resolved by telescopes , much of what we know comes from the study of their albedos .
For example , the absolute albedo can indicate the surface ice content of outer solar system objects , the variation of albedo with phase angle gives information about regolith properties , while unusually high radar albedo is indicative of high metallic content in asteroids .
Enceladus , a moon of Saturn , has one of the highest known albedos of any body in the Solar system , with 99 of EM radiation reflected .
Another notable highalbedo body is Eris , with an albedo of 0 . 96 .
Many small objects in the outer solar system and asteroid belt have low albedos down to about 0 . 05 .
A typical comet nucleus has an albedo of 0 . 04 .
Such a dark surface is thought to be indicative of a primitive and heavily space weathered surface containing some organic compounds .
The overall albedo of the Moon is around 0 . 12 , but it is strongly directional and nonLambertian , displaying also a strong opposition effect .
While such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terrains , they are typical of the regolith surfaces of airless solar system bodies .
Two common albedos that are used in astronomy are the geometric albedo and the Bond albedo .
Their values can differ significantly , which is a common source of confusion .
In detailed studies , the directional reflectance properties of astronomical bodies are often expressed in terms of the five Hapke parameters which semiempirically describe the variation of albedo with phase angle , including a characterization of the opposition effect of regolith surfaces .
The correlation between astronomical albedo , absolute magnitude and diameter is : , where is the astronomical albedo , is the diameter in kilometers , and is the absolute magnitude .
Although the albedotemperature effect is best known in colder , whiter regions on Earth , the maximum albedo is actually found in the tropics where yearround illumination is greater .
The maximum is additionally in the northern hemisphere , varying between three and twelve degrees north .
The minima are found in the subtropical regions of the northern and southern hemispheres , beyond which albedo increases without respect to illumination .
The intensity of albedo temperature effects depend on the amount of albedo and the level of local insolation ; high albedo areas in the arctic and antarctic regions are cold due to low insolation , where areas such as the Sahara Desert , which also have a relatively high albedo , will be hotter due to high insolation .
Tropical and subtropical rain forest areas have low albedo , and are much hotter than their temperate forest counterparts , which have lower insolation .
Because insolation plays such a big role in the heating and cooling effects of albedo , high insolation areas like the tropics will tend to show a more pronounced fluctuation in local temperature when local albedo changes .
Albedo affects climate and drives weather .
All weather is a result of the uneven heating of the Earth caused by different areas of the planet having different albedos .
Essentially , for the driving of weather , there are two types of albedo regions jon Earth : Land and ocean .
Land and ocean regions produce the four basic different types of air masses , depending on latitude and therefore insolation : Warm and dry , which form over tropical and subtropical land masses ; warm and wet , which form over tropical and subtropical oceans ; cold and dry which form over temperate , polar and subpolar land masses ; and cold and wet , which form over temperate , polar and subpolar oceans .
Different temperatures between the air masses result in different air pressures , and the masses develop into pressure systems .
High pressure systems flow toward lower pressure , driving weather from north to south in the northern hemisphere , and south to north in the lower ; however due to the spinning of the Earth , the Coriolis effect further complicates flow and creates several weatherclimate bands and the jet streams .
When an area's albedo changes due to snowfall , a snowtemperature feedback results .
A layer of snowfall increases local albedo , reflecting away warming sunlight so local cooling occurs .
In principle , if no outside temperature change affects this area , the lowered albedo and lower temperature would maintain the current snow and invite further snowfall , deepening the snowtemperature feedback .
However , since local weather is dynamic due to the change of seasons , eventually warm air masses and a more direct angle of sunlight cause melting .
When the melted area reveals surfaces with lower albedo , such as grass or soil , the effect is reversed : the darkening surface lowers albedo , increasing local temperatures , which induces more melting and thus increasing albedo , resulting in still more heating .
Albedo works on a smaller scale , too .
In sunlight , dark clothes absorb more heat and lightcoloured clothes reflect it better , thus allowing some control over body temperature by exploiting the albedo effect of the colour of external clothing .
Because forests are generally attributed a low albedo , , it has been erroneously assumed that removing forests would lead to cooling on the grounds of increased albedo .
Through the evapotranspiration of water , trees discharge excess heat from the forest canopy .
This water vapour rises resulting in cloud cover which also has a high albedo , thereby further increasing the net global cooling effect attributable to forests .
In seasonally snowcovered zones , winter albedos of treeless areas are 10 to 50 higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the trees as readily .
Deciduous trees have an albedo value of about 0 . 15 to 0 . 18 whereas coniferous trees have a value of about 0 . 09 to 0 . 15 .
Studies by the Hadley Centre have investigated the relative effect of albedo change and effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests .
They found that new forests in tropical and midlatitude areas tended to cool ; new forests in high latitudes were neutral or perhaps warming .
Snow albedos can be as high as 0 . 9 ; this , however , is for the ideal example : fresh deep snow over a featureless landscape .
Over Antarctica they average a little more than 0 . 8 .
If a marginally snowcovered area warms , snow tends to melt , lowering the albedo , and hence leading to more snowmelt .
Cryoconite , powdery windblown dust containing soot , sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice sheets .
Water reflects light very differently from typical terrestrial materials .
The reflectivity of a water surface is calculated using the Fresnel equations .
At the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in a locally specular manner .
The glint of light off water is a commonplace effect of this .
At small angles of incident light , waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steepness of the reflectivityvs .
incidentangle curve and a locally increased average incident angle .
Although the reflectivity of water is very low at low and medium angles of incident light , it increases tremendously at high angles of incident light such as occur on the illuminated side of the Earth near the terminator .
However , as mentioned above , waviness causes an appreciable reduction .
Since the light specularly reflected from water does not usually reach the viewer , water is usually considered to have a very low albedo in spite of its high reflectivity at high angles of incident light .
Note that white caps on waves look white because the water is foamed up , so there are many superimposed bubble surfaces which reflect , adding up their reflectivities .
Fresh black ice exhibits Fresnel reflection .
Cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures .
Different types of clouds exhibit different reflectivity , theoretically ranging in albedo from a minimum of near 0 to a maximum approaching 0 . 8 .
'On any given day , about half of Earth is covered by clouds , which reflect more sunlight than land and water .
Clouds keep Earth cool by reflecting sunlight , but they can also serve as blankets to trap warmth . '
Albedo and climate in some areas are affected by artificial clouds , such as those created by the contrails of heavy commercial airliner traffic .
A study following the burning of the Kuwaiti oil fields during Iraqi occupation showed that temperatures under the burning oil fires were as much as 10nbsp ; C colder than temperatures several miles away under clear skies .
Aerosols have both direct and indirect effects on the Earths radiative balance .
The direct effect is generally to cool the planet ; the indirect effect is less certain .
As per the effects are : Another albedorelated effect on the climate is from black carbon particles .
The size of this effect is difficult to quantify : the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates that the global mean radiative forcing for black carbon aerosols from fossil fuels is 0 . 2 W m , with a range 0 . 1 to 0 . 4 W m .
Human activities change the albedo of various areas around the globe .
However , quantification of this effect on the global scale is difficult .
Singlescattering albedo is used to define scattering of electromagnetic waves on small particles .
It depends on properties of the material ; the size of the particle or particles ; and the wavelength of the incoming radiation .
Aristotle was a Greek philosopher and polymath , a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great .
His writings cover many subjects , including physics , metaphysics , poetry , theater , music , logic , rhetoric , linguistics , politics , government , ethics , biology , and zoology .
Together with Plato and Socrates , Aristotle is one of the most important founding figures in Western philosophy .
Aristotle's writings were the first to create a comprehensive system of Western philosophy , encompassing ethics , aesthetics , logic , science , politics , and metaphysics .
Aristotle's views on the physical sciences profoundly shaped medieval scholarship , and their influence extended well into the Renaissance , although they were ultimately replaced by Newtonian physics .
In the zoological sciences , some of his observations were confirmed to be accurate only in the 19th century .
His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic , which was incorporated in the late 19th century into modern formal logic .
In metaphysics , Aristotelianism had a profound influence on philosophical and theological thinking in the Islamic and Jewish traditions in the Middle Ages , and it continues to influence Christian theology , especially the scholastic tradition of the Catholic Church .
Aristotle was well known among medieval Muslim intellectuals and revered asالمعلم الأولThe First Teacher' .
His ethics , though always influential , gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics .
All aspects of Aristotle's philosophy continue to be the object of active academic study today .
Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues , it is thought that the majority of his writings are now lost and only about onethird of the original works have survived .
Aristotle , whose name meansthe best purpose , was born in Stagira , Chalcidice , in 384 BC , about east of modernday Thessaloniki .
His father Nicomachus was the personal physician to King Amyntas of Macedon .
Although there is little information on Aristotle's childhood , he probably did spend some time in the Macedonian palace , making his first connections with the Macedonian monarchy .
At about the age of eighteen , he went to Athens to continue his education at Platos Academy .
Aristotle remained at the academy for nearly twenty years before leaving Athens in 34847 BC .
The traditional story about his departure reports that he was disappointed with the direction the academy took after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus upon his death , although it is possible that he feared antiMacedonian sentiments and left before Plato had died .
He then traveled with Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor .
While in Asia , Aristotle traveled with Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos , where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island .
Aristotle married Hermias's adoptive daughter Pythias .
She bore him a daughter , whom they named Pythias .
Soon after Hermiasdeath , Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander in 343 BC .
Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon .
During that time he gave lessons not only to Alexander , but also to two other future kings : Ptolemy and Cassander .
Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest , and his attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric .
In one famous example , he counsels Alexander to bea leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians , to look after the former as after friends and relatives , and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants' .
By 335 BC he had returned to Athens , establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum .
Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years .
While in Athens , his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira , who bore him a son whom he named after his father , Nicomachus .
According to the Suda , he also had an eromenos , Palaephatus of Abydus .
It is during this period in Athens from 335 to 323 BC when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works .
Aristotle wrote many dialogues , only fragments of which survived .
The works that have survived are in treatise form and were not , for the most part , intended for widespread publication , as they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students .
His most important treatises include Physics , Metaphysics , Nicomachean Ethics , Politics , De Anima and Poetics .
Aristotle not only studied almost every subject possible at the time , but made significant contributions to most of them .
In physical science , Aristotle studied anatomy , astronomy , embryology , geography , geology , meteorology , physics and zoology .
In philosophy , he wrote on aesthetics , ethics , government , metaphysics , politics , economics , psychology , rhetoric and theology .
He also studied education , foreign customs , literature and poetry .
His combined works constitute a virtual encyclopedia of Greek knowledge .
It has been suggested that Aristotle was probably the last person to know everything there was to be known in his own time .
Near the end of Alexander's life , Alexander began to suspect plots against himself , and threatened Aristotle in letters .
Aristotle had made no secret of his contempt for Alexander's pretense of divinity , and the king had executed Aristotle's grandnephew Callisthenes as a traitor .
A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death , but there is little evidence for this .
Upon Alexander's death , antiMacedonian sentiment in Athens once again flared .
Eurymedon the hierophant denounced Aristotle for not holding the gods in honor .
Aristotle fled the city to his mother's family estate in Chalcis , explaining , I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy , a reference to Athens's prior trial and execution of Socrates .
He died in Euboea of natural causes within the same year : 322 BC .
Aristotle named chief executor his student Antipater and left a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife .
In general , the details of the life of Aristotle are not wellestablished .
The biographies of Aristotle written in ancient times are often speculative , and few except the main points are agreed by all historians .
With the Prior Analytics , Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic , and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th century advances in mathematical logic .
Kant stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that Aristotle's theory of logic completely accounted for the core of deductive inference .
Aristotlesays thaton the subject of reasoninghehad nothing else on an earlier date to speak of .
However , Plato reports that syntax was devised before him , by Prodicus of Ceos , who was concerned by the correct use of words .
Logic seems to have emerged from dialectics ; the earlier philosophers made frequent use of concepts like reductio ad absurdum in their discussions , but never truly understood the logical implications .
Even Plato had difficulties with logic ; although he had a reasonable conception of a deductive system , he could never actually construct one , thus he relied instead on his dialectic .
Plato believed that deduction would simply follow from premises , hence he focused on maintaining solid premises so that the conclusion would logically follow .
Consequently , Plato realized that a method for obtaining conclusions would be most beneficial .
He never succeeded in devising such a method , but his best attempt was published in his book Sophist , where he introduced his division method .
What we today call Aristotelian logic , Aristotle himself would have labeledanalytics' .
The termlogiche reserved to mean dialectics .
Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form , since it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers .
The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into six books in about the early 1st century AD : Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics On Sophistical Refutations The order of the books is not certain , but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings .
It goes from the basics , the analysis of simple terms in the Categories , the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation , to the study of more complex forms , namely , syllogisms and dialectics .
The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu : the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning .
There is one volume of Aristotle's concerning logic not found in the Organon , namely the fourth book of Metaphysics .
Like his teacher Plato , Aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal .
Aristotle's ontology , however , finds the universal in particular things , which he calls the essence of things , while in Plato's ontology , the universal exists apart from particular things , and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar .
For Aristotle , therefore , epistemology is based on the study of particular phenomena and rises to the knowledge of essences , while for Plato epistemology begins with knowledge of universal Forms and descends to knowledge of particular imitations of these .
For Aristotle , formstill refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but isinstantiatedin a particular substance .
In a certain sense , Aristotle's method is both inductive and deductive , while Plato's is essentially deductive from a priori principles .
In Aristotle's terminology , natural philosophyis a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world , and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics , biology and other natural sciences .
In modern times , the scope of philosophy has become limited to more generic or abstract inquiries , such as ethics and metaphysics , in which logic plays a major role .
Today's philosophy tends to exclude empirical study of the natural world by means of the scientific method .
In contrast , Aristotle's philosophical endeavors encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry .
In the larger sense of the word , Aristotle makes philosophy coextensive with reasoning , which he also would describe asscience' .
Note , however , that his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the termscientific method' .
For Aristotle , all science is either practical , poetical or theoretical .
By practical science , he means ethics and politics ; by poetical science , he means the study of poetry and the other fine arts ; by theoretical science , he means physics , mathematics and metaphysics .
If logic is regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy , the divisions of Aristotelian philosophy would consist of : Logic ; Theoretical Philosophy , including Metaphysics , Physics and Mathematics ; Practical Philosophy and Poetical Philosophy .
In the period between his two stays in Athens , between his times at the Academy and the Lyceum , Aristotle conducted most of the scientific thinking and research for which he is renowned today .
In fact , most of Aristotle's life was devoted to the study of the objects of natural science .
Aristotle's metaphysics contains observations on the nature of numbers but he made no original contributions to mathematics .
He did , however , perform original research in the natural sciences , e . g . , botany , zoology , physics , astronomy , chemistry , meteorology , and several other sciences .
Aristotle's writings on science are largely qualitative , as opposed to quantitative .
Beginning in the 16th century , scientists began applying mathematics to the physical sciences , and Aristotle's work in this area was deemed hopelessly inadequate .
His failings were largely due to the absence of concepts like mass , velocity , force and temperature .
He had a conception of speed and temperature , but no quantitative understanding of them , which was partly due to the absence of basic experimental devices , like clocks and thermometers .
His writings provide an account of many scientific observations , a mixture of precocious accuracy and curious errors .
For example , in his History of Animals he claimed that human males have more teeth than females .
In a similar vein , John Philoponus , and later Galileo , showed by simple experiments that Aristotle's theory that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect .
On the other hand , Aristotle refuted Democritus's claim that the Milky Way was made up ofthose stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays , pointing out that , givencurrent astronomical demonstrationsthatthe size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun , thennbsp ; . . . the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them . '
In places , Aristotle goes too far in derivinglaws of the universefrom simple observation and overstretched reason .
Today's scientific method assumes that such thinking without sufficient facts is ineffective , and that discerning the validity of one's hypothesis requires far more rigorous experimentation than that which Aristotle used to support his laws .
Aristotle also had some scientific blind spots .
He posited a geocentric cosmology that we may discern in selections of the Metaphysics , which was widely accepted up until the 16th century .
From the 3rd century to the 16th century , the dominant view held that the Earth was the rotational center of the universe .
Since he was perhaps the philosopher most respected by European thinkers during and after the Renaissance , these thinkers often took Aristotle's erroneous positions as given , which held back science in this epoch .
However , Aristotle's scientific shortcomings should not mislead one into forgetting his great advances in the many scientific fields .
For instance , he founded logic as a formal science and created foundations to biology that were not superseded for two millennia .
Moreover , he introduced the fundamental notion that nature is composed of things that change and that studying such changes can provide useful knowledge of underlying constants .
As quoted from Principles of Geology : Aristotle proposed a fifth element , aether , in addition to the four proposed earlier by Empedocles .
Each of the four earthly elements has its natural place .
All that is earthly tends toward the center of the universe , i . e . , the center of the Earth .
Water tends toward a sphere surrounding the center .
Air tends toward a sphere surrounding the water sphere .
Fire tends toward the lunar sphere .
When elements are moved out of their natural place , they naturally move back towards it .
This isnatural motion'motion requiring no extrinsic cause .
So , for example , in water , earthy bodies sink while air bubbles rise up ; in air , rain falls and flame rises .
Outside all the other spheres , the heavenly , fifth element , manifested in the stars and planets , moves in the perfection of circles .
Aristotle defined motion as the actuality of a potentiality as such .
Aquinas suggested that the passage be understood literally ; that motion can indeed be understood as the active fulfillment of a potential , as a transition toward a potentially possible state .
Because actuality and potentiality are normally opposites in Aristotle , other commentators either suggest that the wording which has come down to us is erroneous , or that the addition of theas suchto the definition is critical to understanding it .
Aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active causal factors : Additionally , things can be causes of one another , causing each other reciprocally , as hard work causes fitness and vice versa , although not in the same way or function , the one is as the beginning of change , the other as the goal . .
Moreover , Aristotle indicated that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects ; its presence and absence may result in different outcomes .
Simply it is the goal or purpose that brings about an event .
Our two dominoes require someone or something to intentionally knock over the first domino , since it cannot fall of its own accord .
Aristotle marked two modes of causation : proper causation and accidental causation .
All causes , proper and incidental , can be spoken as potential or as actual , particular or generic .
The same language refers to the effects of causes , so that generic effects assigned to generic causes , particular effects to particular causes , operating causes to actual effects .
Essentially , causality does not suggest a temporal relation between the cause and the effect .
Aristotle held more accurate theories on some optical concepts than other philosophers of his day .
The earliest known written evidence of a camera obscura can be found in Aristotle's documentation of such a device in 350 BC in Problemata .
Aristotle's apparatus contained a dark chamber that had a single small hole , or aperture , to allow for sunlight to enter .
Aristotle used the device to make observations of the sun and noted that no matter what shape the hole was , the sun would still be correctly displayed as a round object .
In modern cameras , this is analogous to the diaphragm .
Aristotle also made the observation that when the distance between the aperture and the surface with the image increased , the image was magnified .
According to Aristotle , spontaneity and chance are causes of some things , distinguishable from other types of cause .
Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things .
It isfrom what is spontaneous .
For a better understanding of Aristotle's conception ofchanceit might be better to think ofcoincidence' : Something takes place by chance if a person sets out with the intent of having one thing take place , but with the result of another thing taking place .
For example : A person seeks donations .
That person may find another person willing to donate a substantial sum .
However , if the person seeking the donations met the person donating , not for the purpose of collecting donations , but for some other purpose , Aristotle would call the collecting of the donation by that particular donator a result of chance .
It must be unusual that something happens by chance .
In other words , if something happens all or most of the time , we cannot say that it is by chance .
There is also more specific kind of chance , which Aristotle namesluck' , that can only apply to human beings , since it is in the sphere of moral actions .
According to Aristotle , luck must involve choice , and only humans are capable of deliberation and choice .
'What is not capable of action cannot do anything by chance' .
Aristotle defines metaphysics asthe knowledge of immaterial being , or ofbeing in the highest degree of abstraction . '
He refers to metaphysics asfirst philosophy' , as well asthe theologic science . '
Aristotle examines the concepts of substance and essence in his Metaphysics , and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form .
In book VIII , he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum , or the stuff of which it is composed .
For example , the matter of a house is the bricks , stones , timbers etc . , or whatever constitutes the potential house , while the form of the substance is the actual house , namelycovering for bodies and chattelsor any other differentia that let us define something as a house .
The formula that gives the components is the account of the matter , and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form .
With regard to the change and its causes now , as he defines in his Physics and On Generation and Corruption 319b320a , he distinguishes the coming to be from : growth and diminution , which is change in quantity ; locomotion , which is change in space ; and alteration , which is change in quality .
The coming to be is a change where nothing persists of which the resultant is a property .
In that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality and actuality in association with the matter and the form .
Referring to potentiality , this is what a thing is capable of doing , or being acted upon , if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else .
For example , the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially plant , and if is not prevented by something , it will become a plant .
Potentially beings can eitheract orbe acted upon , which can be either innate or learned .
For example , the eyes possess the potentiality of sight , while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning .
Actuality is the fulfillment of the end of the potentiality .
Because the end is the principle of every change , and for the sake of the end exists potentiality , therefore actuality is the end .
Referring then to our previous example , we could say that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do .
In summary , the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities , which is also a final cause or end .
Then Aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula , in time and in substantiality .
With this definition of the particular substance , Aristotle tries to solve the problem of the unity of the beings , for example , what is it that makes a man one'
Since , according to Plato there are two Ideas : animal and biped , how then is man a unity
However , according to Aristotle , the potential being and the actual one are one and the same thing .
Aristotle's predecessor , Plato , argued that all things have a universal form , which could be either a property , or a relation to other things .
When we look at an apple , for example , we see an apple , and we can also analyze a form of an apple .
In this distinction , there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple .
Moreover , we can place an apple next to a book , so that we can speak of both the book and apple as being next to each other .
Plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things .
For example , it is possible that there is no particular good in existence , butgoodis still a proper universal form .
Bertrand Russell is a contemporary philosopher who agreed with Plato on the existence ofuninstantiated universals' .
Aristotle disagreed with Plato on this point , arguing that all universals are instantiated .
Aristotle argued that there are no universals that are unattached to existing things .
According to Aristotle , if a universal exists , either as a particular or a relation , then there must have been , must be currently , or must be in the future , something on which the universal can be predicated .
Consequently , according to Aristotle , if it is not the case that some universal can be predicated to an object that exists at some period of time , then it does not exist .
In addition , Aristotle disagreed with Plato about the location of universals .
As Plato spoke of the world of the forms , a location where all universal forms subsist , Aristotle maintained that universals exist within each thing on which each universal is predicated .
So , according to Aristotle , the form of apple exists within each apple , rather than in the world of the forms .
In Aristotelian science , especially in biology , things he saw himself have stood the test of time better than his retelling of the reports of others , which contain error and superstition .
He dissected animals but not humans ; his ideas on how the human body works have been almost entirely superseded .
Aristotle is the earliest natural historian whose work has survived in some detail .
Aristotle certainly did research on the natural history of Lesbos , and the surrounding seas and neighbouring areas .
The works that reflect this research , such as History of Animals , Generation of Animals , and Parts of Animals , contain some observations and interpretations , along with sundry myths and mistakes .
The most striking passages are about the sealife visible from observation on Lesbos and available from the catches of fishermen .
His observations on catfish , electric fish and anglerfish are detailed , as is his writing on cephalopods , namely , Octopus , Sepia and the paper nautilus .
His description of the hectocotyl arm , used in sexual reproduction , was widely disbelieved until its rediscovery in the 19th century .
He separated the aquatic mammals from fish , and knew that sharks and rays were part of the group he called Selachē .
Another good example of his methods comes from the Generation of Animals in which Aristotle describes breaking open fertilized chicken eggs at intervals to observe when visible organs were generated .
He gave accurate descriptions of ruminantsfourchambered forestomachs , and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark Mustelus mustelus .
Aristotle's classification of living things contains some elements which still existed in the 19th century .
What the modern zoologist would call vertebrates and invertebrates , Aristotle calledanimals with bloodandanimals without blood .
Animals with blood were divided into livebearing , and eggbearing .
Invertebrates are insects , crustacea and testacea .
In some respects , this incomplete classification is better than that of Linnaeus , who crowded the invertebrata together into two groups , Insecta and Vermes .
For Charles Singer , Nothing is more remarkable than efforts to the relationships of living things as a scala naturae Aristotle's History of Animals classified organisms in relation to a hierarchicalLadder of Life , placing them according to complexity of structure and function so that higher organisms showed greater vitality and ability to move .
Aristotle believed that intellectual purposes , i . e . , final causes , guided all natural processes .
Such a teleological view gave Aristotle cause to justify his observed data as an expression of formal design .
Noting thatno animal has , at the same time , both tusks and horns , anda singlehooved animal with two horns I have never seen , Aristotle suggested that Nature , giving no animal both horns and tusks , was staving off vanity , and giving creatures faculties only to such a degree as they are necessary .
Noting that ruminants had multiple stomachs and weak teeth , he supposed the first was to compensate for the latter , with Nature trying to preserve a type of balance .
In a similar fashion , Aristotle believed that creatures were arranged in a graded scale of perfection rising from plants on up to man , the scala naturae .
His system had eleven grades , arranged accordingto the degree to which they are infected with potentiality' , expressed in their form at birth .
The highest animals laid warm and wet creatures alive , the lowest bore theirs cold , dry , and in thick eggs .
Aristotle also held that the level of a creature's perfection was reflected in its form , but not preordained by that form .
Ideas like this , and his ideas about souls , are not regarded as science at all in modern times .
He placed emphasis on the type of soul an organism possessed , asserting that plants possess a vegetative soul , responsible for reproduction and growth , animals a vegetative and a sensitive soul , responsible for mobility and sensation , and humans a vegetative , a sensitive , and a rational soul , capable of thought and reflection .
Aristotle , in contrast to earlier philosophers , but in accordance with the Egyptians , placed the rational soul in the heart , rather than the brain .
Notable is Aristotle's division of sensation and thought , which generally went against previous philosophers , with the exception of Alcmaeon .
Aristotle's successor at the Lyceum , Theophrastus , wrote a series of books on botanythe History of Plantswhich survived as the most important contribution of antiquity to botany , even into the Middle Ages .
Many of Theophrastusnames survive into modern times , such as carpos for fruit , and pericarpion for seed vessel .
Rather than focus on formal causes , as Aristotle did , Theophrastus suggested a mechanistic scheme , drawing analogies between natural and artificial processes , and relying on Aristotle's concept of the efficient cause .
Theophrastus also recognized the role of sex in the reproduction of some higher plants , though this last discovery was lost in later ages .
After Theophrastus , the Lyceum failed to produce any original work .
Though interest in Aristotle's ideas survived , they were generally taken unquestioningly .
It is not until the age of Alexandria under the Ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found .
The first medical teacher at Alexandria , Herophilus of Chalcedon , corrected Aristotle , placing intelligence in the brain , and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation .
Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries , noting that the latter pulse while the former do not .
Though a few ancient atomists such as Lucretius challenged the teleological viewpoint of Aristotelian ideas about life , teleology would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 18th and 19th centuries .
Ernst Mayr claimed that there wasnothing of any real consequence in biology after Lucretius and Galen until the Renaissance . '
Aristotle's ideas of natural history and medicine survived , but they were generally taken unquestioningly .
Aristotle's psychology , given in his treatise On the Soul , posits three kinds of soul : the vegetative soul , the sensitive soul , and the rational soul .
Humans have a rational soul .
This kind of soul is capable of the same powers as the other kinds : Like the vegetative soul it can grow and nourish itself ; like the sensitive soul it can experience sensations and move locally .
The unique part of the human , rational soul is its ability to receive forms of other things and compare them .
For Aristotle , the soul was a simpler concept than it is for us today .
By soul he simply meant the form of a living being .
Since all beings are composites of form and matter , the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings , e . g . the ability to initiate movement .
Aristotle considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study , i . e . , one aimed at becoming good and doing good rather than knowing for its own sake .
He wrote several treatises on ethics , including most notably , the Nicomachean Ethics .
Aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function of a thing .
An eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see , because the proper function of an eye is sight .
Aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans , and that this function must be an activity of the psuchē in accordance with reason .
Aristotle identified such an optimum activity of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action , eudaimonia , generally translated ashappinessor sometimeswell being' .
To have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character , often translated as moral virtue .
Aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated not deliberately , but by teachers , and experience , leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things .
When the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom and their intellect can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue , the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker , or in other words , a philosopher .
In addition to his works on ethics , which address the individual , Aristotle addressed the city in his work titled Politics .
Aristotle considered the city to be a natural community .
Moreover , he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family which in turn is prior to the individual , for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part' .
He also famously stated thatman is by nature a political animal' .
Aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine , and as a collection of parts none of which can exist without the others .
Aristotle's conception of the city is organic , and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner .
The common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different to Aristotle's understanding .
Although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires , the natural community according to Aristotle was the city which functions as a politicalcommunityorpartnership .
The aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability , but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life , and to perform beautiful acts : The political partnership must be regarded , therefore , as being for the sake of noble actions , not for the sake of living together . '
This is distinguished from modern approaches , beginning with social contract theory , according to which individuals leave the state of nature because offear of violent deathor itsinconveniences . '
Aristotle considered epic poetry , tragedy , comedy , dithyrambic poetry and music to be imitative , each varying in imitation by medium , object , and manner .
For example , music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony , whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone , and poetry with language .
The forms also differ in their object of imitation .
Comedy , for instance , is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average ; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average .
Lastly , the forms differ in their manner of imitation through narrative or character , through change or no change , and through drama or no drama .
Aristotle believed that imitation is natural to mankind and constitutes one of mankind's advantages over animals .
While it is believed that Aristotle's Poetics comprised two books one on comedy and one on tragedy only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived .
Aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements : plotstructure , character , style , thought , spectacle , and lyric poetry .
The characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story ; and the plot , not the characters , is the chief focus of tragedy .
Tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear , and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions .
Aristotle concludes Poetics with a discussion on which , if either , is superior : epic or tragic mimesis .
He suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic , possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music , is more unified , and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope , it can be considered superior to epic .
Aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles , folklore , and proverbs ; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the Delphic Oracle and studied the fables of Aesop .
Aristotle's analysis of procreation describes an active , ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert , passive female element .
On this ground , feminists have accused Aristotle of misogyny and sexism .
However , Aristotle gave equal weight to women's happiness as he did to men's , and commented in his Rhetoric that a society cannot be happy unless women are happy too .
Modern scholarship reveals that Aristotle'slostworks stray considerably in characterization from the surviving Aristotelian corpus .
Whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with an intent for subsequent publication , the surviving works do not appear to have been so .
Rather the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes unintended for publication .
The authenticity of a portion of the surviving works as originally Aristotelian is also today held suspect , with some books duplicating or summarizing each other , the authorship of one book questioned and another book considered to be unlikely Aristotle's at all .
Some of the individual works within the corpus , including the Constitution of Athens , are regarded by most scholars as products of Aristotle'sschool , perhaps compiled under his direction or supervision .
Others , such as On Colors , may have been produced by Aristotle's successors at the Lyceum , e . g . , Theophrastus and Straton .
Still others acquired Aristotle's name through similarities in doctrine or content , such as the De Plantis , possibly by Nicolaus of Damascus .
Other works in the corpus include medieval palmistries and astrological and magical texts whose connections to Aristotle are purely fanciful and selfpromotional .
According to a distinction that originates with Aristotle himself , his writings are divisible into two groups : theexotericand theesoteric' .
Most scholars have understood this as a distinction between works Aristotle intended for the public , and the more technical works intended for use within the school .
Modern scholars commonly assume these latter to be Aristotle's own lecture notes .
However , one classic scholar offers an alternative interpretation .
The 5th century neoplatonist Ammonius Hermiae writes that Aristotle's writing style is deliberately obscurantist so thatgood people may for that reason stretch their mind even more , whereas empty minds that are lost through carelessness will be put to flight by the obscurity when they encounter sentences like these . '
Another common assumption is that none of the exoteric works is extant that all of Aristotle's extant writings are of the esoteric kind .
Current knowledge of what exactly the exoteric writings were like is scant and dubious , though many of them may have been in dialogue form .
Perhaps it is to these that Cicero refers when he characterized Aristotle's writing style asa river of gold' ; it is hard for many modern readers to accept that one could seriously so admire the style of those works currently available to us .
However , some modern scholars have warned that we cannot know for certain that Cicero's praise was reserved specifically for the exoteric works ; a few modern scholars have actually admired the concise writing style found in Aristotle's extant works .
One major question in the history of Aristotle's works , then , is how were the exoteric writings all lost , and how did the ones we now possess come to us
The story of the original manuscripts of the esoteric treatises is described by Strabo in his Geography and Plutarch in his Parallel Lives .
The manuscripts were left from Aristotle to his successor Theophrastus , who in turn willed them to Neleus of Scepsis .
Neleus supposedly took the writings from Athens to Scepsis , where his heirs let them languish in a cellar until the 1st century BC , when Apellicon of Teos discovered and purchased the manuscripts , bringing them back to Athens .
According to the story , Apellicon tried to repair some of the damage that was done during the manuscriptsstay in the basement , introducing a number of errors into the text .